— ld 


— M 


A 


Bibliotheca Lindestana. 


ΠΤΙ 


αν. 


re 


ΠΣ 


KABBALAH UNVEILED 


KABDALA DENUDATA 


THE 


KABBALAH UNVEILED 


CONTAINING THE FOLLOWING BOOKS OF THE ZOHAR 


1. THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 
2. THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 
3. THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH FROM THE LATIN VERSION OF 
"NORR VON ROSENROTH, AND COLLATED WITH THE 
ORIGINAL CHALDEE AND HEBREW TEXT 


BY 


S L. MAC GREGOR MATHERS 


LONDON 
EN ORGE REDWAY 
1887 


Welicome Library 
for the History 
and Understanding 
of Medicine 


TO 
THE AUTHORS OF “THE PERFECT WAY" 
ANNA KINGSFORD, M.D., AND EDWARD MAITLAND 


THIS TRANSLATION 
15 


Dedicated 


PREFACE. 


Berore finally presenting to the public the first English trans- 
lation of three of the most important books of the “ Zohar,” a 
few additional remarks are necessary. These three books are 
so closely connected in sense as to be practically inseparable, 
the two last forming consecutive developments of the first. 
But, as to launch the unprepared reader on these abstruse 
qabalistical writings without some preparatory explanation of 
the tenets of the Qabalah would be simply to hopelessly be- 
wilder him, I have written a long and full Introduction, in 
which I have endeavoured to explain thoroughly the principal 
dogmas of the “ Zohar,” and have further added explanatory 
notes to the actual text for the better elucidation of difficult 
passages. Therefore I would advise the reader first to 
carefully study the Introduction, and then to read the three 
books of the ** Zohar” in the order in which they stand. 


My translation is principally taken from the Latin version 
of Knorr Von Rosenroth, but I have throughout collated it 
with the original Chaldee and Hebrew text, and in many 
iustances have translated directly therefrom, especially when- 
ever the Latin rendering seemed unreliable. The dialect in 
which the original is written is Aramaic Chaldee, interspersed 
with Hebrew quotations, and the style is difficult and obscure. 


In the “Siphra Dtzenioutha," or “ Book of Concealed 
Mystery,” the translation of the actual text is in the ordinary 
type; Rosenroth’s interpolations, and variant readings from 
the Codices, being distinguished by being in brackets. The 
notes in small print within brackets at the end of each section 
are my own, and they virtually form a commentary on this 
book. 

In the “Idra Rabba,” or ‘‘Greater Holy Assembly," and 
in the “ Idra Zuta,’ or “Lesser Holy Assembly,” variant 
readings are put in brackets; my own or Rosenroth’s addi- 
tions to the text within brackets also, but in italics, Fur- 


viii PREFACE. 


thermore, as Rabbi Schimeon Ben Yochai is the author of 
the bulk of these two books, I have only put his short 
speeches in inverted commas, while I have left his longer 
discourses unmarked. The speeches of all the other Rabbis 
are, however, marked in the ordinary way. 

The renderings of the pronunciation of Hebrew and Chaldee 
words are in all cases put in italics. 


IHVH is usually rendered by “ Tetragrammaton ” instead 
of by “ Jehovah,” for reasons given in the Introduction. 


2 


I have generally commenced words or names relating to: 
the Sephiroth with a capital letter, as also all pronouns refer-- 
ring to the Deity in any of His forms. 


I wish particularly to direct the reader’s attention to the 
stress laid by the Qabalah on the Feminine Aspects of the 
Deity, and to the shameful way in which any allusion to these 
has been suppressed in the ordinary translations of the Bible ; 
also to the qabalistical equality of Male and Female. 


1 have much pleasure in dedicating this work to the Authors 
of the “Perfect Way,” as they have in that excellent and 
wonderful book touched so much on the doctrines of the 
Qabalah, and laid such value on its teachings. The * Perfect 
Way” is one of the most deeply occult works that has been 
written for centuries. 


In the Introduction ($ 20) the derivation of the number: 
3910 from Berashith is given only as a curious speculation, 
and not as accurately fixing a date. 


l have not gone into the meaning of the plural form: 
ADNI, as it may be also taken as ADN-I = my Lord. I 
will, however, just observe that its plural meaning, as applied 
to IHVH, comprehends the Persons included in that Name ; 
and as applied to Malkuth, it comprehends the other nine 
Sephiroth included therein. 


In conclusion, I will merely remark that a short time ago 
there appeared in the “ Theosophist” an excursus by Eliphaz. 
Levi on the *Siphra Dtzenioutha," but that it certainly was 
not a literal translation of the ‘‘ Book of Concealed Mystery '" 
given in this volume. 


S. LIDDELL MacGREGOR MATHERS.. 
Loxpox, May 1887. 


Mx BA LA ΕΙ. 


INTRODUCTION. 


1. THE first questions which the non-qabalistical reader 
will probably ask are: What is the Qabalah? Who 
was its author? What are itssubdivisions? What are 
its general teachings? And why is a translation of it 
required at the present time ? 

2. I will answer the last question first. At the 
present time a powerful wave of occult thought is spread- 
ing through society; thinking men are beginning to 
awake to the fact that * there are more things in heaven 
and earth than are dreamed of in their philosophy ;” 
and, last but not least, it is now felt that the Bible, 
which has been probably more misconstrued than any 
other book ever written, contains numberless obscure and 
mysterious passages which are utterly unintelligible with- 
out some key wherewith to unlock their meaning. THAT 
KEY IS GIVEN IN THE QABALAH. ‘Therefore this work 
should be of interest to every biblical and theological 
student. Let every Christian ask himself this question : 
* How can I think to understand the Old Testament if 
I be ignorant of the construction put upon it by that 
nation whose sacred book it formed; and if I know not 
the meaning of the Old Testament, how can I expect to 
understand the New?” Were the real and sublime 
philosophy of the Bible better known, there would be 

B 


2 παω αμ μι. 


fewer fanatics and sectarians. And who can calculate 
the vastness of the harm done to impressionable and 
excitable persons by the bigoted enthusiasts who ever and 
anon come forward as teachers of the people? How 
many suicides are the result of religious mania and 
depression! What farragos of sacrilegious nonsense 
have not been promulgated as the true meanings of the 
books of the Prophets and the Apocalypse! Given 
a translation of the sacred Hebrew Book, in many in- 
stances incorrect, as the foundation, an inflamed and 
an ill-balanced mind as the worker thereon, what sort of 
edifice can be expected as the result? Isay fearlessly to 
the fanatics and bigots of the present day: You have 
cast down the Sublime and Infinite One from His throne, 
and in His stead have placed the demon of unbalanced 
force; you have substituted a deity of disorder and of 
jealousy for a God of order and of love; you have per- 
verted the teachings of the crucified One.  There- 
fore at this present time an English translation of the 
Qabalah is almost a necessity, for the Zohar has never 
before been translated into the language of this country, 
nor, as far as I am aware, into any modern European 
vernacular. 

3. The Qabalah may be defined as being the esoteric 
Jewish doctrine. It is called in Hebrew QBLH, Qabalah, 
which is derived from the root QBL, Qibel, meaning “ to 
receive." This appellation refers to the custom of 
handing down the esoteric knowledge by oral trans- 
mission, and is nearly allied to “ tradition.” 

4. As in the present work a great number of Hebrew 
or Chaldee words have to be used in the text, and the 
number of scholars in the Shemitic languages is limited, 
I have thought it more advisable to print such words in 
ordinary Roman characters, carefully retaining the exact 
orthography. I therefore append a table showing at a 
glance the ordinary Hebrew and Chaldee alphabet (which 
is common to both languages), the Roman characters by 


PRODUCTION. 


G 


IN 


'88010 OY} JO USI 
001, 

ΠΠ 

*peew eq) JO youcy 
*OOY -SULYST iT 
‘qmo 

"Ån 

‘yaoddns *doxq 
η 

1930 AA 

'peo5-x( 

pue oy} jo wyrg 
ΠΠ 

'juad.roq 

'90u9J fo1nso[ou^p 
‘proms *uodeo M 
qeu ‘q 
ΠΜ 

"X00(T 

puey 

"asnoy] 

‘xO 


“OWBN JO uorvoyrusia 


"nur, 
"us 
"[seq 
*udoQ 
"Ippvzq, 
"eq 
"ui£y 
"Ip[oureg 
'unN 
"Wd IT 
"Power 
"udv?) 
"pox 
“UPL 
"euo 
sur te 
Πολ 
OT] 
"Tereq 
Tut 
“YP 
'qdopy 


"Quit N 


odibNOBUuMdSEgOD 


«ἡ t 


*q.10A si} UL posso1dxo 
yorya Aq αο]οσά ντο urwoy 


ydajy αν sny} 
£ 19399] 1905101 


(onpa po. ‘OOP 
"Hour poe» '008 
poxpmuoos£umps "OOS 
jou oae suy oy.) 'OOT 
'006 = [euq '06 4 
‘008 = [ur ‘os | 

‘OL 
‘09 
004 = Pug ‘og |! 
009 = μυ “Ov |a 
ος 
008 = [eur ος |}. 
(οοοι nq — 'OT 
‘Tjousayiusis — *g 
‘SE 3r pya —'8 
Φου sie} “ZL 
-701 AYZJO ysot  '9 
οῃ1ανη}49515[ “ο 
Y 
5 
G 


v Aq pojyouop 
911 spuesnoqr) ἳ 


*on]VA [torioumN 


EUEUeriÓ.2£-rLrt*U.nmn.nf8uüàab:nm:rro3sk 


“101101 oopieuo 


put Arqo 


? Un 

'$ YS 

"t 

(ngns) yb “D 
2) f$] 

yd ‘d 

(94m3) δι *»» Ὁ 
ES 

" 

"ut 

"yy 3 

* (so ut sv) Æ“ 
*(Suo13s) 7 
*(fe1n33n5) yə 

"ο fn ‘a 
'(Suto4q Ysno.) y 
(11 χο) YP P 
"δ (pwy) 5 

τα) 79 'q 
*(Suryyeaaq yos) 2 


*I1940q 10 punog 


— MÀ A e — — MÀ M 


SALLAT WOG'IVHO ANV ΑΠΠαΠΗ ΠΟ G'IG VILI ALVId 


HN 0 sS NS 


"Jaq un’ 


ei 


4 KABBALAH. 


which I have expressed its letters in this work; also 
their names, powers, and numerical values. There are no 
separate numeral characters in Hebrew and Chaldee; 
therefore, as is also the case in Greek, each letter has its. 
own peculiar numerical value, and from this circumstance 
results the important fact that every word 4s a number, 
and every number is a word. This is alluded to in 
Revelations, where “the number of the beast” is 
mentioned, and on this correspondence between words 
and numbers the science of Gematria (the first division 
of the so-called literal Qabalah) is based. I shall refer 
to this subject again. I have selected the Roman letter 
Q to represent the Hebrew Qoph or Koph, a precedent 
for the use of which without a following w may be found 
in Max Müllers * Sacred Books of the East." The 
reader must remember that the Hebrew is almost 
entirely a consonantal alphabet, the vowels being for 
the most part supplied by small points and marks 
usually placed below the letters. Another difficulty 
of the Hebrew alphabet consists in the great similarity 
between the forms of certain letters—eg., V, Z, and 
final N. 

5. With regard to the author and origin of the 
Qabalah, I cannot do better than give the following 
extract from Dr. Ginsburg’s * Essay on the Kabbalah,” 
first premising that this word has been spelt in a great 
variety of ways—Cabala, Kabalah, Kabbala, &c. Ihave 
adopted the form Qabalah, as being more consonant with 
the Hebrew writing of the word. 

6. “ A system of religious philosophy, or, more properly, 
of theosophy, which has not only exercised for hundreds 
of years an extraordinary influence on the mental 
development of so shrewd a people as the Jews, but has 
captivated the minds of some of the greatest thinkers of 
Christendom in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
claims the greatest attention of both the philosopher 
and the theologian. When it is added that among its 


INTRODUCTION. 5 


captives were Raymond Lully, the celebrated scholastic 
metaphysician and chemist (died 1315); John Reuchlin, 
the renowned scholar and reviver of Oriental literature in 
Europe (born 1455, died 1522); John Picus de Miran- 
dola, the famous philosopher and classical scholar (1463— 
1494); Cornelius Henry Agrippa, the distinguished 
philosopher, divine, and physician (1486-1535); John 
Baptist Von Helmont, a remarkable chemist and physician 
(1577-1644) ; as well as our own countrymen, Robert 
Fludd, the famous physician and philosopher (1574-1637) ; 
and Dr. Henry More (1614-1687); and that these men, 
after restlessly searching for a scientific system which 
should disclose to them ‘the deepest depths’ of the 
divine nature, and show them the real tie which binds all 
things together, found the cravings of their minds satis- 
fied by this theosophy, the claims of the Kabbalah on the 
attention of students in literature and philosophy will 
readily be admitted. The claims of the Kabbalah, how- 
ever, are not restricted to the literary man and the 
philosopher; the poet too will find in it ample materials 
for the exercise of his lofty genius. How can it be other- 
wise with a theosophy which, we are assured, was born 
of God in Paradise, was nursed and reared by the choicest 
of the angelic hosts in heaven, and only held converse 
with the holiest of man's children upon earth. Listen to 
the story of its birth, growth, and maturity, as told by its 
followers. 

7. “The Kabbalah was first taught by God himself to 
a select company of angels, who formed a theosophic 
school in Paradise. After the Fall the angels most 
graciously communicated this heavenly doctrine to the 
disobedient child of earth, to furnish the protoplasts with 
the means of returning to their pristine nobility and 
felicity. From Adam it passed over to Noah, and then 
to Abraham, the friend of God, who emigrated with it to 
Egypt, where the patriarch allowed a portion of this 
mysterious doctrine to ooze out. It was in this way 


6 KABBALAH. 


that the Egyptians obtained some knowledge of it, and 
the other Eastern nations could introduce it into their 
philosophical systems. Moses, who was learned in all 
the wisdom of Egypt, was first initiated into the Qabalah 
in the land of his birth, but became most proficient in it 
during his wanderings in the wilderness, when he not 
only devoted to it the leisure hours of the whole forty 
years, but received lessons in it from one of the angels. 
By the aid of this mysterious science the law-giver was 
enabled to solve the difficulties which arose during his 
management of the Israelites, in spite of the pilgrimages, 
wars, and frequent miseries of the nation. He covertly 
laid down the principles of this secret doctrine in the 
first four books of the Pentateuch, but withheld them 
from Deuteronomy. Moses also initiated the seventy 
elders into the secrets of this doctrine, and they again 
transmitted them from hand to hand. Of all who 
formed the unbroken line of tradition, David and Solomon 
were the most deeply initiated into the Kabbalah. No 
one, however, dared to write it down, till Schimeon Ben 
-Jochai, who lived at the time of the destruction of the 
second temple. . .-. . After his death, his son, Rabbi 
Eleazar, and his secretary, Rabbi Abba, as well as his 
disciples, collated Rabbi Simon Ben Jochai’s treatises, 
and out of these composed the celebrated work called 
ZHR, Zohar, splendour, which is the grand storehouse 
of Kabbalism.” 
8. The Qabalah is usually classed under four heads: 


(a) The practical Qabalah. 
(B) The literal Qabalah. 

(y) The unwritten Qabalah. 
(8) The dogmatic Qabalah. 


9. The practical Qabalah deals with talismanic and 
ceremonial magic, and does not come within the scope of 
this work. 


10. The literal Qabalah is referred to in several places, 


INTRODUCTION. 7 


and therefore a knowledge of its leading principles is 
necessary. It is divided into three parts: GMTRIA, 
Gematria; NVTRIQVN, Notarigon; and THMVRH, 
Temura. 

II. Gematria is a metathesis of the Greek word 
γραμματεα. It is based on the relative numeri- 
cal values of words, as I have before remarked. Words 
of similar numerical values are considered to be explana- 
tory of each other, and this theory is also extended to 
phrases. Thus the letter Shin, SH, is 300, and is equiva- 
lent to the number obtained by adding up the numerical 
values of the letters of the words RVCu ALHIM, Ruach 
Elohim, the spirit of the Elohim; and it is therefore a 
symbol of the spirit of the Elohim. For R=200, V=6, 
Gu. A=, L= 30, IB iO, M 1059921 —300. 
Similarly, the words ACHD, Achad, Unity, One, and 
AHBH, Ahebah, love, each = 13; for A=1, CH=8, 
ο ο. τ and A-r, H—5, B=2, H=s5, 
total=13. Again, the name of the angel MTTRVN, 
Metatron or Methraton, and the name of the Deity, 
SHDI, Shaddai, each make 314; so the one is taken as 
symbolical of the other. The angel Metatron is said to 
have been the conductor of the children of Israel through 
the wilderness, of whom God says, ‘‘My Name is in 
him." With regard to Gematria of phrases (Gen. xlix. 
IO), IBA SHILH, Yeba Shiloh, “Shiloh shall come” = 
358, which is the numeration of the word ΜΒΗΪΟΗ, 
Messiah. Thus also the passage, Gen. xviii. 2, d HNH 
SHLSHH, Vehenna Shalisha, ** And lo, three men,” equals 
in — e value ALV MIKAL GBRIAL VRPAL, 
Elo Mikhael Gabriel Ve-Raphael, ‘These are Mikhael, 
Gabriel and Raphael;” for each phrase = 70r. I 
think these instances will suttice to make clear the 
nature of Gematria, especially as many others will be 
found in the course of the ensuing work. 

12. Notariqon is derived from the Latin word notarius, 
a shorthand writer. Of Notariqon there are two forms. 


8 KABBALAH. 


In the first every letter of a word is taken for the initial 
or abbreviation of another word, so that from the letters 
of a word a sentence may be formed. Thus every letter 
of the word BRASHITH, Berashith, the first word in 
Genesis, is made the initial of a word, and we obtain 
BRASHITH RAH ALHIM SHIQBLV ISHRAL THVRH, 
Besrashith Rahi Elohim Sheyequebelo Israel Torah: “In 
the beginning the Elohim saw that Israel would accept 
the law.” In this connection I may give six very in- 
teresting specimens of Notariqon formed from this same 
word BRASHITH by Solomon Meir Ben Moses, a Jewish 
Qabalist, who embraced the Christian faith in 1665, and 
took the name of Prosper Rugere. These have all a 
Christian tendency, and by their means Prosper con- 
verted another Jew, who had previously been bitterly 
opposed to Christianity. The first is; BN RVCH AB 
SHLVSHTHM ICHD THMIM, Ben, Ruach, Ab Shaloshethem 
Yechad Themim: “ The Son, the Spirit, the Father, Their 
Trinity, Perfect Unity." The second is, BN RYCH AB 
SHLVSHTHM ICHD THOBVDV, Ben, Ruach, Ab, Shalo- 
shethen. Yechad Thaubodo: “The Son, the Spirit, the 
Father, ye shall equally worship Their Trinity.” The 
third is; BKVRI RASHVNI ASHR SHMV ISHVO 
THOBVDV, .Bekori .Rashuni Asher Shamo Yeshuah 
Thaubodo: ** Ye shall worship My first-born, My first, 
Whose name is Jesus.” The fourth is, BBVA RBN 
ASHR SHMV ISHVO THOBVDV, Beboa Rabban Asher 
Shamo Yeshuah Thaubodo : “ When the Master shall come 
Whose Name is Jesus ye shall worship.” The fifth is, 
BTHVLH RAVIH ABCHR SuTuLD ISuVO THASHRVH, 
Bethulah Raviah Abachar Shethaled Yeshuah Thashroah : 
* I will choose a virgin worthy to bring forth Jesus, and 
ye shall call her blessed.” The sixth is, BOVGTH 
RTzPIM ASTHTHR SRGVPI ISHVO THAKLYV, Beaugoth 
Ratzephim Asattar Shegopi Yeshuah Thakelo: “I wil 
hide myself in cake (baked with) coals, for ye shall eat 
Jesus, My Body.” The Qabalistical importance of these 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


sentences as bearing upon the doctrines of Christianity 
can hardly be overrated. 

13. The second form of Notariqon is the exact reverse 
of the first. By this the initials or finals, or both, or the 
medials, of a sentence, are taken to form a word or 
words. Thus the Qabalah is called CHK MH NSTHRH, 
Chokhmah Nesethrah,“ the secret wisdom ;” and if we take 
the initials of these two words ΟΠ and N, we form by the 
second kind of Notariqon the word CHN, Chen, “ grace.” 
Similarly, from the initials and finals of the words MI 
IOLH LNV HSHMIMH, Mi Iaulah Leno Ha-Shanayunah, 
* Who shall go up for us to heaven?" (Deut. xxx. 12), 
are formed MILH, Milah, * circumcision,’ and IHVH, 
the Tetragrammaton, implying that God hath ordained 
circumcision as the way to heaven. 

I4. Temura is permutation. According to certain 
rules, one letter is substituted for another letter pre- 
ceding or following it in the alphabet, and thus from one 
word another word of totally different orthography may 
be formed. Thus the alphabet is bent exactly in half, in 
the middle, and one half is put over the other; and 
then by changing alternately the first letter or the first 
two letters at the beginning of the second line, twenty- 
two commutations are produced. ‘These are called the 
* "able of the Combinations of TZIRVP," Zziruph. For 
example’s sake, I will give the method called ALBTH, 
Albath, thus: 


II IO 9 8 2 6 5 4 B 2 I 
K I μοι Z V H D G B A 
M N ο RBR "77 Q R SH Ππ L 


Each method takes its name from the first two pairs 
composing it, the system of pairs of letters being the 
groundwork of the whole, as either letter in a pair is 
substituted for the other letter. Thus, by Albath, from 
RVCu, Ruach, is formed DTZO, Detzau. The names of 
the. other twenty-one methods are: ABGTH, AGDTu, 


IO KABBALAH. 


ADBG, AHBD, AVBH, AZBV, ACHBZ, AIBO, μυ 
AKBI, ALBK, AMBL, ANBM, ASBN, AOBS, APBO, 
ATzBP, AQBTz, ARBQ, ASHBR, and ΠΗ, ND 
these must be added the modes ABGD and ALBM. 
Then comes the “ Rational Table of Tziruph," another 
set of twenty-two combinations. There are also three 
“ Tables of the Commutations," known respectively as 
the Right, the Averse, and the Irregular. To make any 
of these, a square, containing 484 squares, should be 
made, and the letters written in. For the * Rüght 
Table" write the alphabet across from right to left ; in 
the second row of squares do the same, but begin with B 
and end with A; in the third begin with G and end 
with B; and so on. For the “ Averse Table" write the 
alphabet from right to left backwards, beginning with 
TH and ending with A; in the second row begin with SH 
and end with TH, &c. The ‘Irregular Table” would 
take too long to describe. Besides all these, there is the 
method called THSHRQ, Thashraq, which is simply writing 
a word backwards. There is one more very important 
form, called the * Qabalah of the Nine Chambers," or 
AIQ BKR, Aiq Bekar. It is thus formed: 


300 30 3 | 200 2 100 IO I 
ss L ae] R Xx nio OMNE 
600 co Ὁ | 500 50 5 | 400 40 4 
Máml S Υ | Kiml N H| Tr MW D 
* πω ec ee 
Tz final Tz "T Pfinal P Cu Nds, 0 2 


I have put the numeration of each letter above to 
show the affinity between the letters in each chamber. 
Sometimes this is used as a cipher, by taking the 
portions of the figure to show the letters they contain, 
putting one point for the first letter, two for the second, 


INTRODUCTION. II 


&c. Thus the right angle, containing AIQ, will answer 
for the letter Q if it have three dots or points within it. 
Again, a square will answer for H, N, or K final, accord- 
ing to whether it has one, two, or three points respectively 
placed within it. So also with regard to the other 
letters. But there are many other ways of employing 
the Qabalah of the Nine Chambers, which I have not 
space to describe. Iwill merely mention, as an example, 
that by the mode of Temura called ATHBSuH, Athbash, 
it is found that in Jeremiah xxv. 26, the word SHSHN, 
Sheshakh, symbolizes BBL, Babel. 

I5. Besides all these rules, there are certain meanings 
hidden in the shape of the letters of the Hebrew alpha- 
bet; in the form of a particular letter at the end of a 
word being different from that which it generally bears 
when it is a final letter, or in a letter being written in 
the middle of a word in a character generally used only 
at the end; in any letter or letters being written in a 
size smaller or larger than the rest of the manuscript, or 
in a letter being written upside down; in the variations 
found in the spelling of certain words, which have a 
letter more in some places than they have in others; in 
peculiarities observed in the position of any of the points 
or accents, and in certain expressions supposed to be 
elliptic or redundant. 

I6. For example the shape of the Hebrew letter 
Aleph, A (see Plate I.), is said to symbolize a Vau, V, 
between a Yod, I, and a Daleth, D; and thus the letter 
itself represents the word IVD, Yod. Similarly the 
shape of the letter He, H, represents a Daleth, D, with a 
Fod, I, written at the lower left-hand corner, &c. 

I7. In Isaiah ix. 6, 7, the word LMRBH, Lemar- 
bah, for multiplying, is written with the character for 
M finalin the middle of the word, instead of with the 
ordinary initial and medial M. The consequence of this 
is that the total numerical value of the word, instead 
of being 30 4- 404-200 4-2 - 5 —277, is 30-600 4- 200 


n KABBALAH. 


+2+5=837=by Gematria ToTu ZL, Tat Zal, the 
profuse Giver. ‘Thus, by writing the M final instead of 
the ordinary character, the word is made to bear a 
different qabalistical meaning. 

18. In Deuteronomy vi. 4, &c., is the prayer 
known as the “Shema Yisrael.” It begins, * SuMO 
ISHRAL IHVH ALHINV IHVH ACHD, Shemaa 


Yisrael, Tetragrammaton Elohino Tetragrammaton Aehad : 
* Hear, O Israel, Tetragrammaton your God is Tetra- 
grammaton Unity." In this verse the terminal letter 
O in SHMO, and the D in ACHD are written much 
larger than the other letters of the text. The qaba- 
listical symbology contained in this circumstance is thus 
explained: The letter O, being of the value of 70, shows 
that the law may be explained in seventy different ways, 
and the D=4= the four cardinal points and the letters 
of the Holy Name. The first word, SHMO, has the 
numerical value of 410, the number of years of the 
duration of the first temple, &c. &c. "There are many 
other points worthy of consideration in this prayer, but 
time will not permit me to dwell on them. 

19. Other examples of deficient and redundant spell- 
ing, peculiarities of accent and pointing, &c., will be 
found in various places in the ensuing work. 

20. It is to be further noted with regard to the first 
word in the Bible, BRASHITH, Berashith, that the first 
three letters, BRA, are the initial letters of the names of 
the three persons of the Trinity: BN, Ben, the Son; 
RVCH, Ruach, the Spirit; and AB, Ab, the Father. 
Furthermore, the first letter of the Bible is B, which is 
the initial letter of BRKH, Berakhah, blessing; and 
not A, which is that of ARR, Arar, cursing. Again, 
the letters of Berashith, taking their numerical powers, 
express the number of years between the Creation and 
the birth of Christ, thus: *B=2,000, R=2e0, INS 


* See note to the numerical values in the Table of the Hebrew Alphabet, 
&c., Plate I. 


INTRODUCTION. 13 


πιο. [=10, and TH=400; total—3910 
years, being the time in round numbers. Picus de 
Mirandola gives the following working out of BRASHITH, 
Berashith :—By joining the third letter, A, to the first, 
B, AB, Ab=Father, is obtained. If to the first letter 
B, doubled, the second letter, R, be added, it makes BBR, 
Bebar=in or through the Son. If all the letters be 
read except the first, it makes RASHITH, Rashith=the 
beginning. If with the fourth letter, SH, the first B and 
the last TH be connected, it makes SHBTH, Shebeth=the 
end or rest. If the first three letters be taken, they 
make BRA, Bera = created. If, omitting the first, the 
three following be taken, they make RASH, Rash =head. 
If, omitting the two first, the next two be taken, they 
give ASH, Ash = fire. If the fourth and last be joined, 
they give SHTH, Sheth =foundation. Again, if the second 
letter be put before the first, it makes RB, Rab = great. 
If after the third be placed the fifth and fourth, it 
gives AISH, Aish = man. If to the two first be joined 
the two last, they give BRITH, Berith = covenant. And 
if the first be added to the last, it gives THB, Theb, 
which is sometimes used for TVB, Thob = good. 

21. Taking the whole of these mystical anagrams in 
proper order, Picus makes the following sentence out of 
this one word BRASHITH :—Pater in filio (aut per filium) 
principium et finem (sive quietem) creavit caput, ignem, 
et fundamentum magni hominis fadere bono: ‘Through 
the Son hath the Father created that Head which is 
the beginning and the end, the fire-life and the foun- 
dation of the supernal man (the Adam Qadmon) by His 
righteous covenant.” Which is a short epitome of the 
teachings of the “ Book of Concealed Mystery." This 
notice of the literal Qabalah has already extended beyond 
its proper limits. It was, however, necessary to be thus 
explicit, as much of the metaphysical reasoning of the 
ensuing work turns on its application. 

22. The term “Unwritten Qabalah” is applied to certain 


I4 KABBALAH. 


knowledge which is never entrusted to writing, but com- 
municated orally. I may say no more on this point, not 
even whether I myself have or have not received it. Of 
course, till the time of Rabbi Schimeon Ben Jochai none 
of the Qabalah was ever written. 

23. The Dogmatic Qabalah contains the doctrinal 
portion. There are a large number of treatises of various 
dates and merits which go to make up the written 
Qabalah, but they may be reduced to four heads : 

(a) The Sepher Yetzirah and its dependencies. 

(6) The Zohar with its developments and com- 
mentaries. 

(y) The Sepher Sephiroth and its expansions. 

(6) The Asch Metzareph and its symbolism. 

24. The SPR ITZzIRH, Sepher Yetzwral or “ρου... 
Formation,” is ascribed to thepatriarch Abraham. It treats 
of the cosmogony as symbolized by the ten numbers and 
the twenty-two letters of the alphabet, which it calls the 
“ thirty-two paths." On these latter Rabbi Abraham Ben 
Dior has written a mystical commentary. The term “path” 
is used throughout the Qabalah to signify a hieroglyphical 
idea, or rather the sphere of ideas, which may be attached 
to any glyph or symbol. 

25. The ZHR, Zohar, or “Splendour,” besides many 
other treatises of less note, contains the following most 
important books, of which the three first are translated in 
this volume: 

(a) The SPRA DTzNIOVTHA, Siphra Dtzenioutha, 
or * Book of Concealed Mystery," which is 
the root and foundation of the Zohar. 

(3) The ADRA RBA QDISHA, Idra Rabba Qadisha, 
or ‘‘Greater Holy Assembly :” this is a develop- 
ment of the ** Book of Concealed Mystery.” 

(y) The ADRA ZVTA QDISHA, Zdra Zuta Qadisha, 
or * Lesser Holy Assembly ; " which is in the 
nature of a supplement to the “ Idra Rabba.” 
These three books treat of the gradual develop- 
ment of the creative Deity, and with Him the 


INTRODUCTION. 15 


Creation. "The text of these works has been 
annotated by Knorr von Rosenroth (the author 
of the “ Qabalah Denudata,") fromthe Mantuan, 
Cremonensian, and Lublinensian Codices, which 
are corrected printed copies ; of these the Man- 
tuan and Cremonensian are the oldest. A 
species of commentary is also given, which is 
distinguished from the actual text by being 
written within parentheses. 

(8) The pneumatical treatise called BITH ALHIM, 
Beth Elohim, or the “ House of the Elohim,” 
edited by Rabbi Abraham Cohen Irira, from 
the doctrines of Rabbi Yitzchaq Loria. It 
treats of angels, demons, elemental spirits, 
and souls. 

(ε) The “ Book of the Revolutions of Souls” is a 
peculiar and discursive treatise, and is an 
expansion of Rabbi Loria's ideas. 

26. The SPR SPIRVTh, Sepher Sephiroth, or ** Book of 
the Emanations,” describes, so to speak, the gradual evolu- 
tion of the Deity from negative into positive existence. 

27. The ASu MTZzRP, Asch Metzareph, or “ Purifying 
Fire,’ is hermetic and alchemical, and is known to few, 
and when known is understood by still fewer. 

28. The principal doctrines of the Qabalah are de- 
signed to solve the following problems :— 

(a) The Supreme Being, His nature and attributes. 

(B) The Cosmogony. 

(y) The creation of angels and man. 

(ò) The destiny of man and angels. 

(ε) The nature of the soul. 

(C) The nature of angels, demons, and elementals. 

(n) The import of the revealed law. 

(9) The transcendental symbolism of numerals. 

(Ὁ The peculiar mysteries contained in the Hebrew 
letters. 

(x) The equilibrium of contraries. 

29. The “Book of Concealed Mystery ” opens with these 


16 KABBALAH. 


words: “ The Book of Concealed Mystery is the book of 
the equilibrium of balance.” What is here meant by 
the terms “equilibrium of balance”? Equilibrium is 
that harmony which results from the analogy of con- 
traries, it is the dead centre where, the opposition of 
opposing forces being equal in strength, rest succeeds 
motion. Itis the central point. It 15 the “point within 
the circle " of ancient symbolism. Itis the living synthesis 
of counterbalanced power. Thus form may be described 
as the equilibrium of light and shade; take away 
either factor, and form is viewless. The term balance is 
applied to the two opposite natures in each triad of the 
Sephiroth, theiv equilibrium forming the third Sephira 
in each ternary. I shall recur again to this subject in 
explaining the Sephiroth, This doctrine of equilibrium 
and balance is a fundamental qabalistical idea. 

30. The ‘‘ Book of Concealed Mystery " goes on to 
state that this “ Equilibrium hangeth in that region which 
is negatively existent. What is negative existence ? 
What is positive existence? The distinction between 
these two is another fundamental idea. To define 
negative existence clearly is impossible, for when it is 
distinctly defined it ceases to be negative existence ; it is 
then negative existence passing into static condition. 
Therefore wisely have the Qabalists shut out from mortal 
comprehension the primal AIN, Ain, the negatively 
existent One, and the AIN SVP, Ain Soph, the limitless 
Expansion; while of even the AIN SVP AVR, Ain Soph 
Aur, the illimitable Light, only a dim conception can be 
formed. Yet, if we think deeply, we shall see that such 
must be the primal forms of the unknowable and name- 
less One, whom we, in the more manifest form speak of as 
Gop. Heis the Absolute. But how define the Absolute ? 
Even as we define it, it slips from our grasp, for it ceases 
when defined to be the Absolute. Shall we then say that 
the Negative, the Limitless, the Absolute are, logically 
speaking, absurd, since they are ideas which our reason 


INTRODUCTION. 17 


cannot define? No; for could we define them, we 
should make them, so to speak, contained by our reason, 
and therefore not superior to it; for a subject to be 
capable of definition it is requisite that certain limits 
should be assignable to it. How then can we limit the 
Illimitable ? 

31. The first principle and axiom of the Qabalah is 
the name of the Deity, translated in our version of the 
Bible, “I am that I am,” AHIH ASHR AHIH, Lheieh 
Asher Eheich. A better translation is, ‘‘ Existence is 
existence," or “I am He who is.” 

32. Eliphaz Levi Zahed, that great philosopher and 
Qabalist of the present century, says in his “ Histoire 
de la Magie” (bk. i. ch. 7): “The Qabalists have a 
horror of everything that resembles idolatry ; they, how- 
ever, ascribe the human form to God, but it is a 
purely hieroglyphical figure. They consider God as the 
intelligent, living, and loving Infinite One. He is for 
them neither the collection of other beings, nor the 
abstraction of existence, nor a philosophically definable 
being. He is in all, distinct from all, and greater than 
all. His very name is ineffable; and yet this name only 
expresses the human ideal of His Divinity. What God 
is in Himself it is not given to man to know. God is 
the absolute of faith ; existence is the absolute of reason, 
existence exists by itself, and because it exists. The 
reason of the existence of existence is existence itself. 
We may ask, ‘ Why does any particular thing exist ?’ 
that 15. ' Why does such or such a thing exist?’ But we 
cannot ask, without its being absurd to do so, ‘ Why 
does existence exist?’ For this would be to suppose 
existence prior to existence.” Again, the same author 
says (ibid. bk. 11. ch. 2): “Το say, ‘I will believe when 
the truth of the dogma shall be scientifically proved to 
me, is the same as to say, ‘I will believe when I have 
nothing more to believe, and when the dogma shall be 
destroyed as dogma by becoming a scientific theorem.’ 

C 


18 ACABRBALAH. 


That is to say, in other words: ‘I will only admit the 
Infinte when it shall have been explained, determined, 
circumscribed, and defined for my benefit; in one word, 
when it has become finite. I will then believe in the 
Infinite when I am sure that the Infinite does not exist. 
I wil beleve in the vastness of the ocean when I shall 
have seen it put into bottles! But when a thing has 
been clearly proved and made comprehensible to you, 
you will no longer believe it—you will know it.” 

33. In the “ Bhagavadgita,” ch. ix., it is said: ρα 
Immortality and also death; and I, O Arguna! am that: 
which is and that which is not."* And again (ch. ix.) : 
* And, O descendant of Bharata! see wonders in 
numbers, unseen before. Within my body, O Guda- 
kesa ! see to-day the whole universe, including everything 
movable and immovable, all in one." And again (ibid.) 
Arguna said: “O Infinite Lord of the Gods! O Thou 
who pervadest the universe! Thou art the Indestructible, 
that which is, that which is not, and what is beyond 
them. ‘Thou art the Primal God, the Ancient One; 'Thow 
art the highest support of this universe. By Thee is 
this universe pervaded, O Thou of the infinite forms. . .. 
Thou art of infinite power, of unmeasured glory; Thou 
pervadest all, and therefore Thou art all!” 

34. The idea of negative existence can then exist 
as an idea, but it will not bear definition, since the idea. 
of definition is utterly incompatible with its nature. 
* But,” some of my readers will perhaps say, ‘‘ your term 
negative existence is surely a misnomer; the state you 
describe would be better expressed by the title of negative: 
subsistence.” Not so, I answer; for negative subsistence 
can never be anything but negative subsistence ; it cannot 
vary, it cannot develop; for negative subsistence is literally 
and truly no thing. Therefore, negative subsistence can- 
not be at all; it never has existed, it never does exist, it: 
never will exist. But negative existence bears hidden in. 


* Or, “ which exists negatively.” * 


INTRODUCTION. 19 


itself, positive life; for in the limitless depths of the 
abyss of its negativity lies hidden the power of standing 
forth from itself, the power of projecting the scintilla of 
the thought unto the utter, the power of re-involving the 
syntagma into the inner. Thus shrouded and veiled is 
the absorbed intensity in the centreless whirl of the vast- 
ness of expansion. Therefore have I employed the term 
** Ex-sto," rather than * Sub-sto." 

35. But between two ideas so different as those of 
negative and positive existence a certain nexus, or con- 
necting-link, is required, and hence we arrive at the form 
which is called potential existence, which while more 
nearly approaching positive existence, will still scarcely 
admit of clear definition. It is existence in its possible 
form. For example, in a seed, the tree which may spring 
from it is hidden; it is in a condition of potential existence; 
is there ; but it will not admit of definition. How much 
less, then, will those seeds which that tree in its turn may 
yield. But these latter are in a condition which, while 
it is somewhat analogous to potential existence, is in 
hardly so advanced a stage; that is, they are negatively 
existent. 

36. But, on the other hand, positive existence is always. 
capable of definition ; it is dynamic ; it has certain evident 
powers, and it is therefore the antithesis of negative 
existence, and still more so of negative subsistence. It 
is the tree, no longer hidden in the seed, but developed 
into the outer. Bui positive existence has a beginning 
and an end, and it therefore requires another form from 
which to depend, for without this other concealed 
negative ideal behind it, it is unstable and unsatisfactory. 

37. Thus, then, have I faintly and with all reverence 
endeavoured to shadow forth to the minds of my readers 
the idea of the Illimitable One. And before that idea, 
and of that idea, I can only say, in the words of an 
ancient oracle: *In Him is an illimitable abyss of 
glory, and from it there goeth forth one little spark 

C 2 


20 KABBALAH. 


which maketh all the glory of the sun, and of the moon, 
and of the stars. Mortal! behold how little I know of 
God ; seek not to know more of Him, for this is far be- 
yond thy comprehension, however wise thou art; as for 
us, who are His ministers, how. small a part are we of 
Elus 1” 

38. There are three qabalistical veils of the negative 
existence, and in themselves they formulate the hidden 
ideas of the Sephiroth not yet called into being, and 
they are concentrated in Kether, which in this sense is 
the Malkuth of the hidden ideas of the Sephiroth. I 
will explain this. The first veil of the negative exist- 
ence is the AIN, Ain = Negativity. This word consists 
of three letters, which thus shadow forth the first three 
Sephiroth or numbers. The second veil is the AIN 
SVP, Ain Soph =the Limitless. This title consists of 
six letters, and shadows forth the idea of the first six 
Sephiroth or numbers. The third veil is the AIN SVP 
AVR, Ain Soph Aur = the Limitless Light. This again 
consists of nine letters, and symbolizes the first nine 
Sephiroth, but of course in their hidden idea only. But 
when we reach the number nine we cannot progress 
farther without returning to the unity, or the number 
one, for the number ten is but a repetition of unity 
freshly derived from the negative, as is evident from a 
glance at its ordinary representation in Arabic numerals, 
where the circle ο represents the Negative and the 1 
the Unity. Thus, then, the limitless ocean of negative 
light does not proceed from a centre for it is centreless, but 
4t concentrates a centre, which is the number one of the 
manifested Sephiroth, Kether, the Crown, the First 
Sephira; which therefore may be said to be the Malkuth 
or number ten of the hidden Sephiroth. (See Plate II.) 
Thus, “ Kether is in Malkuth, and Malkuth is in Kether." 
Or, as an alchemical author of great repute (Thomas 
Vaughan, better known as Eugenius Philalethes) says,* 

* “Euphrates; or, The Waters of the East.” 


COE aged 99Έ| aL) 


‘TE Feld 


 VHIHd3S 1SUl4 3H 
HIOHIHd3S N3QOIH JHL 


— — —MMÓM —  ——. 


1 Ἠ3ΗΙ3) NI 9NI 
ONILVINWHOS 


1VHIN32NO29 ανν 


`F ΝΒΟΦΟΗ 


NIV FHL 30 STISA-GNO1D 3Ηι 


“SUVAINYNS B'OHLIS TIAN « 


INTRODUCTION. 2I 


apparently quoting from Proclus: “That the heaven is 
in the earth, but after an earthly manner; and that the 
earth is in the heaven, but after a heavenly manner." 
But inasmuch as negative existence is a subject incapable 
of definition, as I have before shown, it is rather con- 
sidered by the Qabalists as depending back from the 
number of unity than as a separate consideration there- 
from; wherefore they frequently apply the same terms 
and epithets indiscriminately to either. Such epithets 
are “The Concealed of the Concealed,” ‘‘ The Ancient of. 
the Ancient Ones," the * Most Holy Ancient One,” &c. 

39. I must now explain the real meaning of the terms 
Sephira and Sephiroth. The first is singular, the second 
is plural. The best rendering of the word is “ numerical 
emanation.” There are ten Sephiroth, which are the, 
most abstract forms of the ten numbers of the decimal 
ΜΠ ο the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ὃ, 9, IO. 
Therefore, as in the higher mathematics we reason of 
numbers in their abstract sense, so in the Qabalah we 
reason of the Deity by the abstract forms of the numbers ; 
in other words, by the SPIRVTu, Sephiroth. It was 
from this ancient Oriental theory that Pythagoras derived 
his numerical symbolic ideas. 

40. Among these Sephiroth, jointly and severally, we 
find the development of the persons and attributes of God. 
Of these some are male and some female. Now, for some 
reason or other best known to themselves, the trans- 
lators of the Bible have carefully crowded out of existence 
and smothered up every reference to the fact that the 
Deity is both masculine and feminine. They have trans- 
lated a feminine plural by a masculine singular in the 
case of the word Elohim. They have, however, left an. 
inadvertent admission of their knowledge that it was 
plural in Gen.iv. 26: “ And Elohim said: Let Us make 
man.” Again (v. 27), how could Adam be made in 
the image of the Elohim, male and female, unless the 
Elohim were male and female also? The word Elohim 


22 KABBALAH. 


is a plural formed from the feminine singular ALH, Floh, 
by adding IM to the word. But inasmuch as IM is 
usually the termination of the masculine plural, and is 
here added to a feminine noun, it gives to the word 
Elohim the sense of a female potency united to a mascu- 
line idea, and thereby capable of producing an offspring. 
Now, we hear much of the Father and the Son, but we 
hear nothing of the Mother in the ordinary religions of 
the day. But in the Qabalah we find that the Ancient 
of Days conforms Himself simultaneously into the Father 
and the Mother, and thus begets the Son. Now, this 
Mother is Elohim. Again, we are usually told that the 
Holy Spirit is masculine. But the word RVCu, Ruach, 
Spirit, is feminine, as appears from the following passage 
of the Sepher Yetzirah : “ ACHTH RVCu ALHIM CuIIM, 
Achath (feminine, not Achad, masculine) Ruach Elohim 
Chiim : One is She the Spirit of the Elohim of Life.” 

41. Now, we find that before the Deity conformed 
Himself thus—i.e., as male and female—that the worlds 
of the universe could not subsist, or, in the words of 
Genesis, * The earth was formless and void.” These 
prior worlds are considered to be symbolized by the 
* kings who reigned in Edom before there reigned a 
king in Israel," and they are therefore spoken of in the 
Qabalah as the * Edomite kings." ‘This will be found 
fully explained in various parts of this work. 

42. We now come to the consideration of the first 
Sephira, or the Number One, the Monad of Pythagoras. 
In this number are the other nine hidden. It is 
indivisible, it is also incapable of multiplication ; divide 
1 by itself and it still remains 1, multiply 1 by itself 
and it is still 1 and unchanged. Thus it is a fitting 
representative of the great unchangeable Father of all. 
Now this number of unity has a twofold nature, and thus 
forms, as it were, the link between the negative and the 
positive. In its unchangeable one-ness it is scarcely a 
number; but in its property of capability of addition 


INTRODUCTION, 23 


it may be called the first number of a numerical series. 
Now, the zero, o, is incapable even of addition, just as 
also is negative existence. How, then, if I can neither 
be multiplied nor divided, is another 1 to be obtained 
to add to it; in other words, how is the number 2 to be 
found? By reflection of itself. For though o be in- 
capable of definition, 1 is definable. And the effect of a 
definition is to form an Eidolon, duplicate, or image, of 
the thing defined. Thus, then, we obtain a duad com- 
posed of 1 and its reflection. Now also we have the 
commencement of a vibration established, for the number 
I vibrates alternately from changelessness to definition, 
and back to changelessnes again. Thus, then, is it the 
father of all numbers, and a fitting type of the Father 
of al! things. 

The name of the first Sephira is KTHR, Kether, the 
Crown. 

The Divine Name attributed to it is the Name of the 
Father given in Exod. iii, 4: AHIH, Eheieh, lara. It 
signifies Existence. 

Among the epithets applied to it, as containing in itself 
the idea of negative existence depending back from it, are: 

. TMIRA DTMIRIN, Zemira De-Temirin, the Con- 
cealed of the Concealed. 

OTHIQA DOTHIQIN, Authiqa De-Authiqin, the 
Ancient of the Ancient Ones. 

OTHIQA QDISHA, Authiqa Qadisha, the Most Holy 
Ancient One. 

OTHIQA, Authiqa, the Ancient One. 

OTHIQ IVMIN, Authiq Jomin, the Ancient of Days. 

It is also called : 

. NQDH RASHVNH, Nequdah Rashunah, the Pri- 
mordiai Point. 

NQDH ῬΡΗΥΤΗ, Nequdah Peshutah, the Smooth 
Point. 

RISHA HVVRH, Risha Havurah, the White Head. 

RYM MOLH, Rom Moeolah, the Inscrutable Height. 


24 « KABBALAH. 


Besides all these there is another very important name 
applied to this Sephira as representing the great Father 
of all things. It is ARIK ANPIN, Arikh Anpin, the 
Vast Countenance, or Macroprosopus. Of Him it is said 
that He is partly concealed (in the sense of His connec- 
tion with the negative existence) and partly manifest (as 
a positive Sephira). Hence the symbolism of the Vast 
Countenance is that of a profile wherein one side only of 
the countenance is seen; or, as it is said in the Qabalah, 
“in Him all is right side.” I shall refer to this title 
again. 

The whole ten Sephiroth represent the Heavenly Man, 
or Primordial Being, ADM OILAH, Adam Auilah. 

Under this Sephira are classed the angelic order of 
CuIV' TH HQDSnH, Chioth Ha-Qadesh, holy hving-crea- 
tures, the kerubim or sphinxes of Ezekiels vision and 
of the Apocalypse of John. ‘These are represented in 
the Zodiac by the four signs, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and 
Aquarius—the Bull, Lion, Eagle, and Man: Scorpio, as 
a good emblem, being symbolized by the eagle, as an 
evil emblem by the scorpion, and as of a mixed nature 
by the snake. 

This first Sephira contained the other nine, and pro- 
duced them in succession, thus :---- 

43. The number 2, or the Duad. "The name of the 
second Sephira is CHKMH, Chokmah, Wisdom, a mascu- 
line active potency reflected from ether, as I have 
before explained. This Sephira is the active and evident. 
Father, to whom the Mother is united, who is the number 
3. This second Sephira is represented by the Divine 
Names, IH, Yah, and IHVH ; and among the angelic 
hosts by AVPNIM, Auphanim, the Wheels (Ezek. 1.). 
It is also called AB, Ad, the Father. 

- 44. The third Sephira, or Triad, is a feminine passive 
potency, called BINH, Pinah, the Understanding, who is. 
co-equal with Chokmah. For Chokmah, the number 2, 
is like two straight lines which can never enclose a space, 


INTRODUCTION. 25 


and therefore it is powerless till the number 3 forms 
the triangle. Thus this Sephira completes and makes 
evident the supernal Trinity. It is also called AMA, 
Ama, Mother, and AIMA, Aima, the great productive 
Mother, who is eternally conjoined with AB, the Father, 
for the maintenance of the universe in order. There- 
fore is she the most evident form in whom we can know 
the Father, and therefore is she worthy of all honour. 
She is the supernal Mother, co-equal with Chokmah, and 
the great feminine form of God, the Elohim, in whose 
image man and woman are created, according to the 
teaching of the Qabalah, equal before God. Woman is 
equal with man, and certainly not inferior to him, as it 
has been the persistent endeavour of so-called Christians 
to make her. Aima is the woman described in the 
Apocalypse (ch. xii.) This third Sephira is also sometimes 
called the Great Sea. To her are attributed the Divine 
names, ALHIM, Zlohim, and IHVH ALHIM; and the 
angelic order, ARALIM, .Aralim, the Thrones. She is 
the supernal Mother, as distinguished from Malkuth, the 
inferior Mother, Bride, and Queen. 

45. The number 4. This union of the second and 
third Sephiroth produced CuSD, Chesed, Mercy or Love, 
also called GDVLH, Gedulah, Greatness or Magnificence ; 
a masculine potency represented by the Divine Name 
AL, Æl, the Mighty One, and the angelic name, 
CHSHMLIM, Chashmalim, Scintillating Flames (Ezek. 
iv. 4). 

46. The number 5. From this emanated the feminine 
passive potency GBVRH, Geburah, strength or fortitude ; 
or DIN, Deen, Justice ; represented by the Divine Names, 
ALHIM GBVR, and ALH, Zloh, and the angelic name 
SHRPIM, Seraphim (Isa. vi. 6). This Sephira is also 
called PCHD, Pachad, Fear. 

47. Thenumber 6. And from these two issued the unit- 
ing Sephira, THPARTH, Ziphereth, Beauty or Mildness, 
represented by the Divine Name ALVH ΥΡΟΤΗ, Eloah 


26 KABBALAH. 


Va-Daath, and the angelic names, Shinanim, SHNANIM 
(Ps. lxviii. 18), or MLKIM, Melakim, kings. Thus by 
the union of justice and mercy we obtain beauty or 
clemency, and the second trinity of the Sephiroth is 
complete. This Sephira, or “ Path,” or “ Numeration "— 
for by these latter appellations the emanations are some- 
times called—together with the fourth, fifth, seventh, 
eighth, and ninth Sephiroth, is spoken of as ZOIR 
ANPIN, Zawir Anpin, the Lesser Countenance, or Micro- 
prosopus, by way of antithesis to Macroprosopus, or the 
Vast Countenance, which is one of the names of Kether, 
the first Sephira. The six Sephiroth of which Zawir 
Anpin is composed, are then called His six members. 
He is also called MLK, Melekh, the King. 

48. The number 7. The seventh Sephira is ΝΤΖΟΗ, 
-Netzach, or Firmness and Victory, corresponding to the 
Divine Name Jehovah Tzabacth, IHVH TzBAVTs, the 
Lord of Armies, and the angelic names ALHIM, Elohim, 
gods, and THRSHISHIM, Zharshisim, the brilliant ones 
(Danocx. 6). 

49. The number 8. Thence proceeded the feminine 
passive potency HVD, Hod, Splendour, answering to the 
Divine Name ALHIM ΤΖΒΑΥΊΗ, Elohim Tzabaoth, the 
Gods of Armies, and among the angels to BNI ALHIM, 
Bent Elohim, the sons of the Gods (Gen. vi. 4). 

50. The number ο, ‘These two produced ISVD, 
Yesod, the Foundation or Basis, represented by AL Cul, 
El Chai, the Mighty Living One, and SHDI, Shaddai ; 
and among the angels by ASHIM, Azshim, the Flames 
(Ps, civ. 4), yielding the third Trinity of the Sephiroth. 

51. The number 10. From this ninth Sephira came 
the tenth and last, thus completing the decad of the 
numbers. It is called MLKV'Tr, Malkuth, the Kingdom, 
and also the Queen, Matrona, the inferior Mother, the Bride 
of Microprosopus; and SHKINH, Shekinah, represented 
by the Divine Name Adonai, ADNI, and among the angelic 
hosts by the kerubim, KRVBIM. Now, each of these 
Sephiroth will be in a certain degree androgynous, for 


INTRODUCTION, 27 


it will be feminine or receptive with regard to the Sephira 
which immediately precedes it in the sephirotic scale, and 
masculine or transmissive with regard to the Sephira 
which immediately follows it. But there is no Sephira 
anterior to  Kether, nor is there a Sephira which 
succeeds Malkuth. By these remarks it will be under- 
stood how Chokmah is a feminine noun, though mark- 
ing a masculine Sephira. The connecting-link of the 
Sephiroth is the Ruach, spirit, from Mezla, the hidden 
influence. 

52. I will now add a few more remarks on the qaba- 
listical meaning of the term MTHQLA, AMethegela, bal- 
ance. In each of the three trinities or triads of the 
Sephiroth is a duad of opposite sexes, and a uniting in- 
telligence which is the result. In this, the masculine 
and feminine potencies are regarded as the two scales of 
the balance, and the uniting Sephira as the beam which 
joins them. Thus, then, the term balance may be said 
to symbolize the Triune, Trinity in Unity, and the Unity 
represented by the central point of the beam. But, 
again, in the Sephiroth there is a triple Trinity, the 
upper, lower, and middle. Now, these three are repre- 
sented thus: the supernal, or highest, by the Crown, 
Kether; the middle by the King, and the inferior by the 
Queen; which will be the greatest trinity. And the 
earthly correlatives of these will be the primum mobile, 
the sun and the moon. Here we at once find alchemical 
symbolism. 

53. Now in the world the Sephiroth are represented by : 

(1) ΒΑΡΗΙΤΗ HGLGLIM, Rashith Ha-Galgalim, the 

commencement of whirling motions, the primum 
mobile, 

(2) MSLYTH, Masloth, the sphere of the Zodiac. 

(3) SHBTHAI, Shabbathai, rest, Saturn. 

(4) TzDQ, Tzedeg, righteousness, Jupiter. 

(5) MADIM, Madim, vehement strength, Mars. 

(6) SHMSuH, Shemesh, the solar light, the Sun. 

(7) NVGH, Nogah, glittering splendour, Venus. 


28 KABBALAH. 


(8) KVKB, Kokab, the stellar light, Mercury. 

(ο) LBNH, Zevanah, the lunar flame, the Moon. 

(το) CHLM ISVDVTu, Cholom Yesodoth, the breaker 
of the foundations, the elements. 

54. The Sephiroth are further divided into three 
pillars—the right-hand Pillar of Mercy, consisting of the 
second, fourth, and seventh emanations; the left-hand 
Pillar of Judgment, consisting of the third, fifth, and 
eighth; and the middle Pillar of Mildness, consisting of 
the first, sixth, ninth, and tenth emanations. 

55. In their totality and unity the ten Sephiroth 
represent the archetypal man, ADM QDMVN, Adam 
Qadmon, the Protogonos. In looking at the Sephiroth 
constituting the first triad, it is evident that they repre- 
sent the intellect; and hence this triad is called the 
intellectual world, OVLM MVSHKL, Olahm Mevshekal. 
The second triad corresponds to the moral world, OVLM 
MVRGSu, Olahm Morgash. The third represents power 
and stability, and is therefore called the material world, 
OVLM HMVTBO, Olahm Ha-Mevetbau. These three 
aspects are called the faces, ANPIN, Anpin. Thus is 
the tree of life, OTz CHIIM, Otz Chaiim, formed; the 
first triad being placed above, the second and third 
below, in such a manner that the three masculine 
Sephiroth are on the right, the three feminine on the 
left, whilst the four uniting Sephiroth occupy the centre. 
This is the qabalistical “tree of life," on which all 
things depend. There is considerable analogy between 
this and the tree Yggdrasil of the Scandinavians. 

56. I have already remarked that there is one trinity 
which comprises all the Sephiroth, and that it consists of 
the crown the king, and the queen. (In some senses 
this is the Christian Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit, which in their highest Divine nature are sym- . 
bolized by the first three Sephiroth, Kether, Chokmah, and 
Binah.) It is the Trinity which created the world, or, 
in qabalistic language, the universe was born from the 


(ΘΖ aged ΘΟΈ] OL) 
YOU yo ue 


IVNOOV 


MIULOTV 10142 JUT wp MOpPLUIY IY L-HLRHATVN SUAISOMMOLIY, JO opug oy[ 


01 
UIING) IYI 
| 


= ——— = 


 IWH) T3 
o UONUPUNOT - COSTA. 


HIOVSVIL'HVAOH3P ^ 
[01224 — H)VZL3N ~ / QMOM qe E 


~ 


- ~a 
- 
ή 


 "HLI0VSVZL WIHOT3 
vy 4nopu2;d*-qoH 


4 


y pu JVuaucid pa y E Q 
| E i l A | 
| CR bury FUT πώς - | 
| = : vdd i 
| E WIHOT13 d | 
| /nv?g -M [3H3Hd IL | 
| dms I 
M — 7 Oi ΜΝ : 
NL 5 BIUDURUNOJ MISSIT IY, - | 
ο πα” Hv1hn039" sndoseld 0421 τα τμ 
13 p | Ds HV0T3 = 
Pari san E : N YIU - AYE NGAD 
+ p POM 7240] | N S 
| 2221211211 6121’ τ 27182} 29.226 Ν 4227 ~QvHoVd 
΄΄ : 
i ^ i i 
| 74 | | 
| MC A | 
! dá | \ ! 
e | MT | 
“LIYIOT IY T Ϊ TOUIJGANG «21071 IY Τ 
a V ! HVAOH3D — 
MOPSIAL~ HVWHXOHO | gymobayiaruy- HM Nie 
EST PULOM OMINUT J 5 
be 0221/21 15117 T 
ES LYDIA ojgvinoosupoyr vo 
21207 YLOOUS IYI 21004 2221 OMA 27/7 
BINAISINT - H303H3 
104227 I -M3H 13 
2")qu21HE AUT | »»2{9}}}}} 04} 
[J2upu2putnQ) ASDA IY I 
‘sndosoidosa ΙΤ 
ADL [YT SSIUP VY AIMS * 
PY IA YOU "21214 PIPPIN ALGA TT 


INO SSIAILINIT JHL HdOS 
ΠΟ ο ELT 


I} 911g 


NIV 


INTRODUCTION, 29 


union of the crowned king and queen. But according 
to the Qabalah, before the complete form of the heavenly 
man (the ten Sephiroth) was produced, there were cer- 
tain primordial worlds created, but these could not 
subsist, as the equilibrium of balance was not yet 
perfect, and they were convulsed by the unbalanced 
force and destroyed. These primordial worlds are 
called the “kings of ancient time," and the “ kings of 
Edom who reigned before the monarchs of Israel.” In 
this sense, Edom is the world of unbalanced force, and 
Israel is the balanced Sephiroth (Gen. xxxvi. 31). This 
important fact, that worlds were created and destroyed 
prior to the present creation, is again and again reiterated 
in the Zohar. 

57. Now the Sephiroth are also called the World 
of Emanations, or the Atziluthic World, or archetypal 
world, OVLM ATzILVTu, Olahm Atziloth ; and this 
world gave birth to three other worlds, each containing 
a repetition of the Sephiroth, but in a descending scale 
of brightness. 

58. The second world is the Briatic world, OVLM 
HBRIAH, Olahm Ha-Lriah, the world of creation, also 
called KVRSIA, Khorsia, the throne. It is an imme- 
diate emanation from the world of Atziloth, whose ten 
Sephiroth are reflected herein, and are consequently more 
limited, though they are still of the purest nature, and 
without any admixture of matter. 

59. The third is the Jetziratic world, OVLM 
HITZIRH, Olahm Ha-Yetzirah, or world of formation 
and of angels, which proceeds from Briah, and though 
less refined in substance, is still without matter. It is 
in this angelic world where those intelligent and in- 
corporeal beings reside who are wrapped in a luminous 
garment, and who assume a form when they appear 
unto man. 

60. The fourth is the Asiatic world, OVLM HO- 
SHIH, Olahm Ha-Asiah, the world of action, called 


30 KABBALAH. 


also the world of shells, OVLM HQLIPVTuH, Olahm 
Ha-Qliphoth, which is this world of matter, made up of 
the grosser elements of the other three. In it is also 
the abode of the evil spirits, which are called “ the 
shells” by the Qabalah, QLIPVTH, Qliphoth, material 
shells. The devils are also divided into ten classes, and 
have suitable habitations. (See Table.) 

61. The Demons are the grossest and most deficient 
of all forms. Their ten degrees answer to the decad 
of the Sephiroth, but in inverse ratio, as darkness and 
impurity increase with the descent of each degree. The 
two first are nothing but absence of visible form and 
organization. The third is the abode of darkness. 
Next follow seven Hells occupied by those demons which 
represent incarnate human vices, and torture those who 
have given themselves up to such vices in earth-life. 
Their prince is Samael, SMAL, the angel of poison and 
of death. His wife is the harlot, or woman of whoredom, 
ΑΡΗΤΗ ZNVNIM, Jsheth Zenunim; and united they 
are called the beast, CHIVA, Chioa. Thus the infernal 
trinity is completed, which is, so to speak, the averse 
and caricature of the supernal Creative One. Samael is 
considered to be identical with Satan. 

62. The name of the Deity, which we call Jehovah, is 
in Hebrew a name of four letters, IHVH ; and the true 
pronunciation of it is known to very few. I myself 
know some score of different mystical pronunciations of 
it. The true pronunciation is a most secret arcanum, 
and is a secret of secrets. “He who can rightly pro- 
nounce it, causeth heaven and earth to tremble, for it is 
the name which rusheth through the universe." There- 
fore when a devout Jew comes upon it in reading the 
Scripture, he either does not attempt to pronounce it, but 
instead makes a short pause, or else he substitutes for it 
the name Adonai, ADNI, Lord. The radical meaning of 
the word is “to be," and it is thus, like AHIH, .Eheieh, 
a glyph of existence. It is capable of twelve transposi- 


-_— 
o 


ATZILOTRH. 


LM Lo 


Ten 
Sephirotb. 


. Wether. 
. Chokhmah. 


Binah. 
Chesed. 
Geburah. 


. Tiphereth. 


Netzach. 
Hod. 
Yesod. 
Malkuth. 


Ten 
Divine Names. 


Eheieh. 

Jehovah. 

Jehovah Elohim. 
El. 

Elohim Gibor. 
Eloah Vadaath. 
Jehovah 'l'aabaoth. 
Elohim Tzabaoth. 
Shaddai, El Chai. 
Adonai Melekh. 


BRIAN. 
tO OF" 


Ten 
Archangels, 


Methratton. 
Ratziel. 
Tzaphaiel. 
Tzadqiel. 
Khamael. 
Mikhael. 
Haniel. 
Raphael. 
Gabriel. 
Methratton. 


— ayuu ^w. - 


Y ETZIRAH, 
ae a cc 


Ten Orders of 
Angels. 


Chaioth Ha-Qadesh. | 
Auphanim. | 
Aralm. ( 
Chashmalim. 
Seraphim. 

Malachim. 

Elohim. | 
Beni Elohim. | 
Kerubim. | 


Ishim. 


PLATE IV. 


TABLE showing the relations of the Sephiroth with the Four Worlds, dc. 


ASIAH. 
l CC IEEE DG EC C (A s D CE μις 


Planets, &e., Ten Orters of 


acted on, Demons. Ten Arch-devils. 
Primum Mobile. — Thamiel. Satan aud Moloch. 
Zodiac. Chaigidel. Beelzebub. 
Saturn. Satariel. Lucifuge. 
Jupiter. Gamchicoth. Ashtaroth. 
Mars. Galab. Asmodeus. 
Sun. Tagaririm. Belphegor. 
Venns. Harah-Sera pel. Bask 
Mercury. Samael. Adrammelech. 
Moon. Gamaliel. Lilith. 
Elements, Nahemoth. Nahema. 


Letters of | 
The Tetragrammaton. | 


Ἱ You 
H, The Supernal He: 


5 


| 


V, Vau. 


| 


H. The Inferior He. 


Symbolical Deific Forms. The Four Worlds, 


Macroprosopus, or the Vast Countenance. Atziloth. Archetypal. 
The Father. 

Briah. ive. 
The Mother Supernal. | ria Creative 
Microprosopus, or the Lesser Countenance. Yetzirah. Formative. 
The Bride of Microprosopus. Asiah, Material. 


= ~e‘ 


.- 
9 


CONAWAY Ν π 


ATZILOTH. 


"Ten 


Sephiroth. 


Kether. 
Chokhmah. 
Binah. 
Chesed. 
Geburah. 
Tiphereth. 
Netzach. 
Hod. 
Yesod. 
Malkuth. 


Ten 
Divine Names. 


Eheieh. 
Jehovah. 
Jehovah Eiohim. 
El. 

Elohim Gibor. 
Eloah Vadaath. 


Jehovah 'l'zabaoth. 


Elohim Tzabaoth. 
Shaddai, El Chai. 
Adonai Melekh. 


Briad. 
Ve aN 


Ten 
Archangels, 


Methratton. 
Ratziel. 
Tzaphaiel. 
Tzadqiel. 
Khamael. 
Mikhael. 
Haniel. 
Raphael. 
Gabriel. 
Methratton. 


YETZIRAH. 
VER E 


Ten Orders of 
Angels. 


Chaioth Ha-Qadesh. 
Auphanim. 

Aralim. 
Chashmalim. 
Seraphim. 
Malachim. 

Elohim. 

Beni Elohim. 
Kerubim. 

Ishim. 


INTRODUCTION. 31 


tions, which all convey the meaning of “to be”; it is 
the only word that will bear so many transpositions 
without its meaning being altered. They are called the 
* twelve banners of the mighty name,’ and are said by 
some to rule the twelve signs of the Zodiac. These are 
the twelve banners:—IHVH, IHHV, IVHH, HVHI, 
DATA HAY, VHHI VEHH, VHIH, HIHV, HIVH, 
HHVI. There are three other tetragrammatic names, 
which are AHIH, Eheieh, existence; ADNI, Adonai, 
Lord; and Agla, AGLA. This last is not, properly 
speaking, a word, but is a notariqon of the sentence, 
ATHH GBVR LOVIM ADNI, Ateh Gebor Lc-Olahm 
Adonai: ‘*Thou are mighty for ever, O Lord!” A brief 
explanation of Agla is this: A, the one first; A, the one 
last; G, the Trinity in Unity; L, the completion of the 
great work. 

63. The first thing we notice is that both AHIH and 
IHVH convey the idea of existence; this is their first 
analogy. The second is, that in each the letter H comes 
second and fourth; and the third is that by Gematria 
AHIH equals IHV without the H (which, as we shall see 
presently, is the symbol of Malkuth, the tenth Sephira). 
But now, if they be written one above the others, thus, 
within the arms of a cross, 


AH|IH 
I HIVE 


they read downwards as well as across, AHIH, IHVH. 

64. Now, if we examine the matter qabalistically we 
shall find the reason of these analogies. For Lheieh, 
ΑΗΤΗ. isthe Vast Countenance, the Ancient One, Macro- 
prosopus, Kether, the first Sephira, the Crown of the 
Qabalistical Sephirotic greatest Trinity (which consists of 
the Crown, King, and Queen; or Macroprosopus, Micro- 
prosopus and the Bride), and the Father in the Christian 
acceptation of the Trinity. 

65. But IHVH, the Tetragrammaton, as we shall 


32 KABBALAH. 


presently see, contains all the Sephiroth with the excep- 
tion of Kether, and specially signifies the Lesser Counte- 
nance, Microprosopus, the King of the qabalistical Sephi- 
rotic greatest Trinity, and the Son in His human incar- 
nation, in the Christian acceptation of the Trinity. 

Therefore, as the Son reveals the Father, so does 
IHVH, Jehovah, reveal AHIH, Lheiech. 

66. And ADNI is the Queen, “by whom alone 
‘Tetragrammaton can be grasped,” whose exaltation into 
Binah is found in the Christian assumption of the Virgin. 

67. The Tetragrammaton IHVH is referred to the 
Sephiroth, thus: the uppermost point of the letter Yod, 
I, is said to refer to Kether ; the letter I itself to Chokmah, 
the father of Microprosopus; the letter H, or “ the 
supernal He,” to Binah, the supernal Mother ; the letter 
V to the next six Sephiroth, which are called the six 
members of Microprosopus (and six is the numerical 
value of V, the Hebrew Vau); lastly, the letter H, the 
“inferior He,” to Malkuth, the tenth Senki the bail of 
Microprosopus. 

68. Now, there are four secret names referred to 
the four worlds of  Atziloth, .Briah, Yetzirah, and 
Asiah; and again, the Tetragrammaton is said to go 
forth written in a certain manner in each of these four 
worlds. The secret name of Atziloth is Aub, OB; that 
of Briah is Seg, SG; that of Yetzirah is Mah, MH; and 
that of Asiah is Ben,* BN. The subjoined Table will 
show the mode of writing the name in each of the four 
worlds. 

69. These names operate together with the Sephiroth 
through the “ 231 gates,” as the various combinations of 
the alphabet are called ; but it would take too much space 
to go fully into the subject here. 

70. Closely associated with the subject of the letters of: 
the 'Tetragrammaton is that of the four kerubim, to which 
I have already referred in describing the first Sephira. 


* BN, Ben, means “Son.” 


33 


TMPRODUCTION, 


"opp A PH ‘pox 
"MM “AA ΠΗ͂ ‘CAI 
miss ar I 


"yey NLA QLH “pox 
VH ‘AVA ‘VH ‘GAI 
m A Se I 


‘g “ΠΛ OH ‘pox 
TH AWA IH ‘GAT 
MoN Ww I 


“OTT ΔΙΛ VH “pox 
ΤΗ ‘ATA ‘TH ‘CAI 
eo & di^ I 


"nA “PH {pox 
"AA ‘HH ‘AAI 
A wr T 


MRA PH 'pox 
‘AVA ‘VH ‘CAI 
‘A GH —I 


TU A ‘ORT ‘pox 
"A Wed, M CA 
"A wb T 


"MA H ‘POA 
"ALA ‘TH ‘CAI 
AN I 


"TTT ‘pox ox 
‘HH "TAI “CAI 
a ΙΙ T 
eH ‘POA "pox 
'VH ΑΙ "TAI 
A I an 
OE ‘POA οι 
μη Ὁ TAI 
T I Jn 
‘OH ‘POX "pox 
Gat ‘Gal 
Ἢ I Ai 


° » πο Να P . . HVISV 


: ' . uvepr “HAN : *— HVUIZLI X 


Sog “Og ' : " mnvnigq 


'  * απο E tonny 


‘Spl Loyi ANOT οὐ} fo s[ovo wi ορ τρ 040], e Dun fo popou 91} Dwiavos aig v], 


Α ULV Td 


ou KALBBALAH. 


Now it must not be forgotten that these forms in Ezekiel’s 
vision support the throne of the Deity, whereon the 
Heavenly Man is seated—the Adam Qadmon, the sephi- 
rotic image; and that between the throne and the living 
creatures is the firmament. Here then we have the four 
worlds—Atziloth, the deific form; Briah, the throne; 
Yetzirah, the firmament; Asiah, the kerubim. Therefore 
the kerubim represent the powers of the letters of the 
Tetragrammaton on the material plane; and the four 
represent the operation of the four letters in each of the 
four worlds. Thus, then, the kerubim are the living 
forms of the letters, symbolized in the Zodiac by Taurus, 
Leo, Aquarius, and Scorpio, as I have before remarked. 
71. And “the mystery of the earthly and mortal 
man is after the mystery of the supernal and immortal 
One;” and thus was he created the image of God upon 
earth. In the form of the body is the Tetragrammaton 
found. The head is I,* the arms and shoulders are like 
H, the body is V, and the legs are represented by the 
H final. Therefore, as the outward form of man corre- 
sponds to the Tetragrammaton, so does the animating 
soul correspond to the ten supernal Sephiroth; and as 
these find their ultimate expression in the trinity of the 
crown, the king, and the queen, so is there a principal 
triple division of the soul. Thus, then, the first is the 
Neschamah, NSnMH, which is the highest degree of 
being, corresponding to the crown (Kether), and repre- 
senting the highest triad of the Sephiroth, called the 
intellectual world. The second is Ruach, RVCu, the 
seat of good and evil, corresponding to Tiphereth, the 
moral world. And the third is Nephesch, NPSu, the 
animal life and desires, corresponding to Yesod, and the 
material and sensuous world. All souls are pre-existent 
in the world of emanations, and are in their original 
state androgynous, but when they descend upon earth 
they become separated into male and female, and inhabit 


* See Plate I., the Table of the Hebrew Alphabet, for the forms of the 
letters of the Tetragrammaton, 


Plate VI. 
PLATE ILLUSTRATING THE ANALOGY BETWEEN THE 


SOUL.THE LETTERS OF TETRAGRAMMATON & THE FOUR . 
WORLDS. 


Chiah, the highest Form, from AtzLloth 
gible illimitable, indefinable idea 
comprehensible God, Lheretore 


the Archelypal World, therefore the intan- 
in the Soul of the Great Absolute In- 
analogous to Macroprosopus . 


Seschamah.the second form tran Briat, 
creattve idea, the aspiration. to the In- 
analogous to thelellers\ A conjoined 
connecting link between Macroprosopus 
father andthe 


the World of Geation,the higher governing 
ellable One, in the Soul. Therefore 
- i S |en Bruch existent Consubstantial the 
Neschamah = and Microprosopus, the Supernal 

SY Supernal Mother. 


Ruach. the third Form. from 
the Mine the Reasoning Power 
of Good and Evil, the Power 
and Conclusion, Therelore analo 

the 


Yetzirah the World of Formation 
thal which possesses the hnowledge 
of Dehinition Limitation, Deduction 


-gous to the letter Y. Microprosapus, 
Son. 


Mphesch thefourth form 
Material World, the 
completion of all 
power inthe Soul 
the [asstons 
appetites. 
analogous to 
final the Bride 
the Lambs Wite 
who ts the 


from Asiah; the 
realization and 
things: that 
which represents 
and Physical 
Th erefore. 
the letter H 
of Micreprosopus, 
ol the. lpocebupse 
sun ol all. 


Vephesch 


AE A. i Ü n 
et On € Rea lizat 


(To face page 35) 


INTRODUCTION. 35 


different bodies; if therefore in this mortal life the male 
half encounters the female half, a strong attachment 
springs up between them, and hence it is said that in 
marriage the separated halves are again conjoined ; and 
the hidden forms of the soul are akin to the kerabim. 
72. But this foregoing triple division of the soul is 

only applicable to the triple form of the intellectual, 
moral, and material. Let us not lose sight of the great 
qabalistical idea, that the trinity is always completed by and 
finds its realization in the quaternary ; that is, IHV com- 
pleted and realized in [HV H—+the trinity of 

Crown ; King ; Queen ; 

Father ; Son ; Spirit ; 

Absolute; ^ Formation; Realization ; 


completed by the quaternary of— 


Absolute One Father and | Son Bride. 
Mother 
Macroprosopus, the | Father and | Microprosopus, the | Malkuth, the 
Vast Countenance| Mother Lesser Countenance! Queen and 
Bride. 
Atziloth Briah Yetzirah Asiah. 
Archetypal Creative | Formative | Material. 


And to these four the soul answers in the following four 
forms :—Chiah to Atziloth ; Neschamah to Briah ; Ruach 
to Yetzirah; and Nephesch to Asiah. See subjoined 
plate illustrating the analogy between the soul, the letters 
of the Tetragrammaton, and the four worlds. 

73. But Chiah is in the soul the archetypal form 
analogous to Macroprosopus. Wherefore Neschamah, 
Ruach, and Nephesch represent as it were by themselves 
the Tetragrammaton, without Chiah, which is nevertheless 
symbolized “in the uppermost point of the I, yod,” of the 
soul; as Macroprosopus is said to be symbolized by the 
uppermost point of the I, yod, of IHVH. For “yod of 
the Ancient One is hidden and concealed." 

74. I select the following résumé of the qabalistical 
teachings regarding the nature of the soul from Eliphaz 

D 2 


36 KABBALAH. 


Levis * Clef des Mystéres," as also the accompanying 
plate. This gives the chief heads of the ideas of Rabbi 
Moses Korduero and of Rabbi Yitzchaq Loria. 

“ The soul is a veiled light. This light is triple: 

* Neschamah —the pure spirit ; 

* Ruach —the soul or spirit ; 

* Nephesch=the plastic mediator. 

“ The veil of the soul is the shell of the image. 

“ The image is double because it reflects alike the good 
and the evil angel of the soul. 

* Nephesch is immortal by renewal of itself through 
the destruction of forms; 

* Ruach is progressive through the evolution of 
ideas ; 

* Neschamah is progressive without forgetfulness and 
without destruction. 

**'There are three habitations of souls :— 

“The Abyss of life ; 
“ The superior Eden; 
“ The inferior Eden." 

“The image Tzelem is a sphinx which propounds the 
enigma of life. 

“ The fatal image (?.e., that which succumbs to the outer) 
endows Nephesch with its attributes, but Ruach can 
substitute the image conquered by the inspirations of 
Neschamah. 

“The body is the veil of Nephesch, Nephesch is the 
vell of Ruach, Ruach is the veil of the shroud of 
Neschamah, 

* Light personifies itself by veiling itself, and the 
personification is only stable when the veil is perfect. 

“ This perfection upon earth is relative to the universal 
soul of the earth (i.e., as the macrocosm or greater world, 
so the microcosm or lesser world, which is man). 

* There are three atmospheres for the souls. 

-* The third atmosphere finishes where the planetary 
attraction of the other worlds commences. 


Plate VII. 


PLATE SHOWING THE FORMATION OF THE SOUL, &€ 
/ From Clef cles Mystères” by Eliphaz Levi Zahed.) 


The 
Higher Aspirations 


NSH MH 


NVeschamah 


The Reason The Passions 


RV CH NP Sd 
Ruach. Nephesch, 


4 
\ 
\ 


Ne 
^ 
£N 


The Evil Angel 


SMAL 


Sanracl 
PL the Soul. 


The Good Anget 
MIKAL 
Michael 

of the Soul, 


The Image 
Tz LM 


Teeter. 


(To face page 2 


INTRODUCTION. 37 


* Souls perfected on this earth pass on to another 
station. 

* After traversing the planets they come to the sun; 
then they ascend into another universe and recommence 
their planetary evolution from world to world and from 
sun to sun. 

* In the suns they remember, and in the planets they 
forget. 

«Το solar lives are the days of eternal life, and the 
planetary lives are the nights with their dreams. 

* Angels are luminous emanations personified, not by 
trial and veil, but by divine influence and reflex. 

“The angels aspire to become men, for the perfect 
man, the man-God,* is above every angel. 

“ The planetary lives are composed of ten dreams of a 
hundred years each, and each solar life is a thousand 
years; therefore is it said that a thousand years are in 
the sight of God as one day. 

* Every week—that is, every fourteen thousand years— 
the soul bathes itself and reposes in the jubilee dream of 
forgetfulness. 

* On waking therefrom it has forgotten the evil and 
only remembers the good.” 

75. In the accompanying plate of the formation of the 
soul there will be seen in the upper part three circles, 
representing the three parts known as Neschamah, 
Ruach, and Nephesch. From Ruach and Nephesch, 
influenced by the good aspirations of Neschamah, proceeds 
Michael, the good angel of the soul; that is to say, the 
synthetical hieroglyph of the good ideas, or, in the 
esoteric Buddhist phraseology, the “ Good Karma” of a 
man. From Nephesch dominating Ruach, and un- 
influenced by the good aspirations of Neschamah, proceeds 
Samüel, the evil angel of the soul; that is to say, the 
synthetical hieroglyph of the evil ideas, the “ evil 


* As distinguished from the God-man. 


38 KABBALAH. 


Karma" of a man. Andthe Tzelem, or image, is double, 
for it reflects alike Michael and Samiiel. 

76. The following is Dr. Jellinek’s* analysis of the 
sephirotic ideas, according to the ethics of Spinoza :— 

I. DErINITION.— By the Being who is the cause 
and governor of all things I understand the Ain Soph 
—i.e., a Being infinite, boundless, absolutely identical 
with itself, united in itself, without attributes, will, 
intention, desire, thought, word, or deed. 

2. DEFINITION.—By Sephiroth I understand the 
potencies which emanated from the Absolute, Ain 
Soph, all entities limited by quantity, which, like the 
will, without changing its nature, wills diverse objects 
that are the possibilities of multifarious things. 

I. Prorosition.—The primary cause and governor 
of the world is the Ain Soph, who is both immanent 
and transcendent. 

(a) PrRoor.—Each effect has a cause, and every- 
thing which has order and design has a governor. 

(b) PRoor.—Everything visible has a limit, what 
is limited is finite, what is finite is not absolutely 
identical; the primary cause of the world is invisible, 
therefore unlimited, infinite, absolutely identical— 
ie., he is the Ain Soph. 

(c) PRoor.—As the primary cause of the world 
is infinite, nothing can exist without (EXTRA) him ; 
hence he is immanent. 

Scholion.—As the Ain Soph is invisible and 
exalted, it is the root of both faith and unbelief. 

II. Proposttion.—The Sephiroth are the medium 
between the absolute Ain Soph and the real world. 

Proor.—As the real world is limited and not 
perfect, it cannot directly proceed from the Ain 
Soph ; still the Ain Soph must exercise his influence 
over it, or his perfection would cease. Hence the 
Sephiroth, which, in their intimate connection with 

* *' Beiträge zur Geschichte der Kabbalah, Erstes Heft.” Leipzig. 1852. 


INYRODUCTION. 59 


the Ain Soph, are perfect, and in their severance 
are imperfect, must be the medium. 

Seholion.—Since all existing things originated by 
means of the Sephiroth, there are a higher, a 
middle, and a lower degree of the real world. 
(Vide infra, Proposition VI.) 

III. Pnorosrriox.— There are ten intermediate 
Sephiroth. 

Pnoor.—All bodies have three dimensions, each 
of which repeats the other (3 x 3); and by adding 
thereto space generally, we obtain the number ten. 
As the Sephiroth are the potencies of all that is 
limited they must be ten. 

(a) Scholion.—The number ten does not contradict 
the absolute unity of the Ain Soph ; as one is the basis of 
all numbers, plurality proceeds from unity, the germs 
contain the development, just as fire, flame, sparks, 
and colour have one basis, though they differ from one 
another. 

(b) Scholion.—Just as cogitation or thought, and even 
the mind as a cogitated object, is limited, becomes con- 
crete, and has a measure, although pure thought proceeds 
from the Ain Soph; so limit, measure, and concretion 
are the attributes of the Sephiroth. 

IV. Proposition.—The Sephiroth are emanations, and 
not creations. 

I. Proor.—As the absolute Ain Soph is perfect, the 
Sephiroth proceeding therefrom must also be perfect ; 
hence they are not created. 

2. Pnoor.—All created objects diminish by abstrac- 
tion; the Sephiroth do not lessen, as their activity never 
ceases; hence they cannot be created. 

Scholion.—tThe first Sephira was in the Ain Soph as a 
power before it became a reality ; then tho second Sephira 
emanated as a potency for the intellectual world; and 
afterwards the other Sephiroth emanated for the moral 
and material worlds. ‘This, however, does not imply a 


40 KABBALAL 


prius and posterius, or a gradation in the Ain Soph, but 
just as a light whose kindled lights, which shine sooner 
and later, and variously, so it embraces all in a unity. 

V. Proposition.—The Sephiroth are both active and 
passive (MQBIL VMTHQBL, Megabil Va-Methegabel). 

Proor.—As the Sephiroth do not set aside the unity of 
the Ain Soph, each one of them must receive from its 
predecessor and impart to its successor—i.e., be receptive 
and imparting. 

VI. Proposition. — The first Sephira is called Zn- 
serutable Height, RVM MOLH, Rom Maaulah; the 
second, Wisdom, CHKMH, Chokmah ; the third, /ntelli- 
gence, BINH, Binah: the fourth, Love, CHSD, Chesed ; the 
fifth, Justice, PCHD, Pachad ; the sixth, Beauty, THPARTH, 
Tiphereth ; the seventh, Firmness, NTzCu, Netzach ; the 
eighth, Splendour, HVD, Hod ; the ninth, the Righteous is 
the Foundation of the World, TZDIQ ISVD OVLM, Tzedig 
Yesod Olahm ; and the tenth, Righteousness, TZDQ, Tzedeq. 

(a) Scholion—The first three Sephiroth form the 
world of thought; the second three the world of soul; 
and the four last the world of body ; thus corresponding 
to the intellectual, moral, and material worlds. 

(b) Seholion.—The first Sephira stands in relation to 
the soul, inasmuch as it is called a unity, ICHIDH, 
Yechidah ; the second, inasmuch as it is denominated 
living, CHIH, Chiah ; the third, inasmuch as it is termed 
Spirit, RVCu, Ruach ; the fourth, inasmuch as it is called 
vital principle, NPSu, Nephesch ; the fifth, inasmuch as it 
is denominated sow, NSHMH, Neschamah: the sixth 
operates on the blood, the seventh on the bones, the 
eighth on the veins, the ninth on the flesh, and the tenth 
on the skin. ! 

(c) Scholion.—' The first Sephira is like the concealed 
light, the second like sky-blue, the third like yellow, the 
fourth like white, the fifth like red,* the sixth like white- 


* This mixture of white and red refers to Microprosopus, as will be seen 
in the greater and lesser Holy Assembly. 


Plate vie 


QUOD SU- - PERIUS, 


MICRO- -PROSOPUS, 


ZAUIR | 
AN PIN 


QUOD IN- - FERIUS. 


( To face page 41.) 


INTRODUCTION. 4I 


red, the seventh like whitish-red, the eighth like reddish- 
white, the ninth like white-red whitish-red reddish- 
white, and the tenth is like the light reflecting all 
colours. 

77. I will now revert to the subject of Arikh Anpin 
and Zauir Anpin, the Macroprosopus and the Micro- 
prosopus, or the Vast and the Lesser Countenances. 
Macroprosopus is, it will be remembered, the first Sephira, 
or Crown Kether; Microprosopus is composed of 
six of the Sephiroth. (See subjoined plate.) In 
Macroprosopus all is light and brilliancy; but Micro- 
prosopus only shineth by the reflected splendour of 
Macroprosopus. The six days of creation correspond to 
the six forms of Microprosopus. ‘Therefore the symbol 
of the interlaced triangles, forming the six-pointed star, 
is called the Sign of the Macrocosm, or of the creation 
of the greater world, and is consequently analogous to 
the two countenances of the Zohar. This, however, is 
not the only occult reason that I have placed this symbol 
in the plate, for it typifies other ideas upon which I 
shall not here enter. The ‘‘ Book of Concealed Mystery” 
fully discusses the symbolism of Macroprosopus and 
Microprosopus; therefore itis well, before reading it, to be 
cognizant of their similarities and differences. The one 
is AHIH, Lheieh; the other is the V, Vau, of the 
Tetragrammaton. The first two letters, I and H, Yod 
and He, are the father and mother of Microprosopus, 
and the H final is his bride. But in these forms is 
expressed the equilibrium of severity and mercy ;* 
severity being symbolized by the two Hs, Hes, the 
mother and the bride, but especially by the latter. But 
while the excess of Mercy is not an evil tendency, but 
rather conveys a certain idea of weakness and want of 
force, too great an excess of severity calls forth the 
executioner of judgment, the evil and oppressive force, 


* Regarding the equilibrium of severity and mercy of which the universe 
is the result. See especially ** Greater Holy Assembly,’ $ 838 et seq. 


42 KARBALAH. 


which is symbolized by Leviathan. Wherefore it is 
said, ‘‘ Behind the shoulders of the bride the serpent 
rears his head:" of the bride, but not of the mother, for 
she is the supernal H, and bruises his head.  * But his 
head is broken by the waters of the great sea.” The sea 
is Binah, the supernal H, the mother. "The serpent is 
the centripetal force, ever seeking to penetrate into 
Paradise (the Sephiroth), and to tempt the supernal Eve 
(the: bride), so that in her turn she may tempt the 
supernal Adam (Microprosopus). 

It is utterly beyond the scope of this Introduction to 
examine this symbolism thoroughly, especially as it 
forms the subject of this work; so I will simply refer 
my reader to the actual text for further elucidation, 
hoping that by the perusal of this introductory notice 
he will be better fitted to understand and follow the 
course of qabalistic teaching there given. 


ERA ΡΕΝΤΟΥΤΗΑ 
(SIPHRA DTZENIOUTHA); 


OR, 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 


CHAPTER I. 


I. Tradition.— The Book of Concealed Mystery " is 
the book of the equilibrium of balance. 


[The word * Dtzenioutha " is difficult to translate, but I think 
its meaning is best expressed by the words “ Concealed Mystery.” 
I have explained in the Introduction the qabalistical meaning of 
the words “ equilibrium” and ** balance,” § 29.] 


2. Tradition.—For before there was equilibrium, 
countenance beheld not countenance. 


[By the two countenances are meant Macroprosopus and 
Microprosopus. See Introduction, §§ 42, 47,64, 65, 67, 73, and 77.] 


3. And the kings of ancient time were dead, and their 
crowns were found no more; and the earth was desolate. 


[The “kings of ancient time” mean the same thing as the 
* Edomite Kings;" that is, they symbolize worlds of ** unbalanced 
force," which, according to the Zohar, preceded the formation of 
this universe. I have explained this also in the Introduction, 
SS 41 and 56. This and the immediately following sections are sup- 
posed to trace the gradual development of the Deity from negative 
into positive existence; the text is here describing the time when 
the Deity was just commencing His manifestation from His primal 


44 KABBALAH. 


negative form. "Therefore, according to the qabalistica! ideas, the 
universe is the garment as it were of the Deity ; he not only con- 
tains all, but 1s Himself all, and exists in all.] 


4. Until that head (which is incomprehensible) desired 
by all desires (proceeding from AIN SVP, Ain Soph, 
the infinite and limitless one), appeared and communi- 
cated the vestments of honour. 


[This Head, which is here described as proceeding from the 
infinite and limitless One, the Ain Soph, is the first Sephira, the 
Crown Kether, otherwise called Arikh Anpin, or Macroprosopus, 
the Vast Countenance. From this first Sephira the other nine 
emanations are produced. I have explained all this in the Intro- 
duction, δ 38-57, in treating of the Sephiroth. | 


5. This equilibrium hangeth in that region which is 
negatively existent in the Ancient One. 


[By the expression “‘ This equilibrium hangeth in that region 
which is negatively existent in the Ancient One,” is meant that the 
other nine Sephiroth (which are equilibrated by their formation in 
trinities) are as yet not developed in the first Sephira, but exist 
within it as the tree exists in the seed from which it springs. By 
“the Ancient One" is intended the first Sephira, the Crown 
Kether, one of whose appellations is Autheqa, the Ancient One. 
From this Sephira, as I have before remarked, the idea of negative 
existence depends back towards the AIN.] 


6. Thus were those powers equiponderated which were 
not yet in perceptible existence. 

[These powers are the other nine Sephiroth, which are, as it 
were, powers of the first Sephira; as soon as they are equated 
they become positively existent through correlation of force. The 
next two sections explain the manner of their equilibration while 
yet negative entities, or rather ideas. ] 


7. In His form (in the form of the Ancient One) 
existeth the equilibrium: it is incomprehensible, it is 
unseen. . 

[But the first idea of equilibrium is the Ancient One (the first 
Sephira, or Crown Kether), because it is the first potential 
limitation of the boundless light which proceeds from the Limitless 
One. That is, the central point of Kether is the equilibrium, 


ee DOOk OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 45 


because the balance does not yet exist, the two opposite poles which 
form the balance not being yet developed. We must not confuse 
these two terms, equilibrium and balance. The balance consists of 
two scales (opposing forces), the equilibrium is the central point 
of the beam. 


8. Therein have they ascended, and therein do they 
ascend—they who are not, who are, and who shall be. 

[Therein (in the equilibrium of Kether) have they ascended 
(developed when they became positively existent), and therein (in 
the equilibrium) do they ascend (have their first existence), they 
(the Sephiroth) who are not (exist negatively), who are (then 
become positive), and who shall be (exist permanently, because 
they are counterbalanced powers). This triple expression “ are 
not, are, and shall be,” also refers to the triple trinity of the 
Sephiroth.] (See Introduction, §§ 52, 64, 65 and 66.) 


9. The head which is incomprehensible is secret in 
secret. 
[This head is Macroprosopus, the Vast Countenance, and is the 


same as the Ancient One, or Crown Kether. It is secret, for 
therein are hidden the other potentialities. | 


10. But it hath been formed and prepared in the like- 
ness of a cranium, and 15 filled with the crystalline dew. 
[The crystalline dew is the creative lux or Aur, AVR, pro- 
ceeding from the Limitless One. The Mantuan Codex calls the 
skull or cranium the first, and the crystalline dew the second con- 
formation of Macroprosopus. ] 


11. His skin is of ether, clear and congealed. 
12. (His hair is as) most fine wool, floating through 
the balanced equilibrium. 

[The ether is the clear and insupportable brilliance of his glory. 
The hair is white—i.e., spotless as wool—to denote the utter 
absence of matter and of shell. The Mantuan Codex calls the 
ether the third conformation, and the hair the fourth, which 
latter it refers to the Sephira Netzach, victory.] 


13. (His forehead is) the benevolence of those bene- 
volences which are manifested through the prayers of the 
inferior powers. 


46 KABBALAH. 


[The supernal benignity which transmits their qualities, 
powers, and offices, to the lower Sephiroth (the inferior powers). 
It must be remembered that each Sephira receives from that which 
immediately precedes it, and transmits to that which nest follows it. 
Thus, each Sephira is said to be feminine or passive as regards its 
predecessor, and masculine or active in respect to its successor. 
(See Introduction, SS 43 and 51.) The Mantuan Codex calls this the 
fifth conformation, and refers it to the idea of the ninth Sephira, 
Yesod, foundation.] 


I4. His eye is ever open and sleepeth not, for it con- 
tinualy keepeth watch. And the appearance of the 
lower is according to the aspect of the higher light. 

[Were the eye to close (the directing thought Divine to be 
abstracted from the Sephiroth), the whole universe would give way, 
for its mainspring would be withdrawn. Because the appearance 
(development) of the lower (nine Sephiroth) is according to (depen- 
dent on) the aspect (ruling thought) of the higher light (Kether, 
the first Sephira). The Mantuan Codex terms this the sixth con- 
formation of Macroprosopus, and refers it, as in the case of the 
fourth conformation, to the primal idea of the Sephira Netzach, 
victory. | 


15. Therein are His two nostrils like mighty galleries, 
whence His spirit rusheth forth over all. (The Mantuan 
Codex adds that this is the seventh conformation, which 
refers to MLKVTnzu, Malkuth, or “the kingdom,” the 
tenth emanation or Sephira of the Deity.) 

[The creative spirit, or the ** breath of life."] 


16. (When, therefore, the Divine law beginneth) 
BRAS#HITH BRA ALHIM ATs HSHMIM VATu HARTZ, 
Berashith Bera Elohim Ath Hashamaim Vaath Haaretz: 
* In the beginning the Elohim created the substance of 
the heavens and the substance of the earth.” (The sense 
is: Six members were created, which are the six numera- 
tions of Microprosopus—viz., benignity as His right 
arm; severity as His left arm; beauty as His body; 
victory as His right leg, glory as His left leg; and the 
foundation as reproductive.) For instead of BRASHITH, 
Berashith, “in the beginning,’ it may be read, BRA 


eee OOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 47 


SulTH, Bera Shith, * He created the six." Upon these 
depend allthings which are below (principally the Queen, 
who is the lowest path, or the bride of Microprosopus, 
and all the three inferior worlds.) 

[The view which the Siphra Dtzenioutha here follows out is that 
the beginning of Genesis describes not only the creation of the 
world, but the development of God, for it considers the universe as 
the outward and material expression of the power of the thought 
Divine. Microprosopus is as it were the reflection of Macroprosopus, 
for as Macroprosopus has six principal titles, so is Microprosopus 
composed of six of the Sephiroth. (See Introduction, δ 42, 47 and 
77.) SulTu, Shith, is the Chaldee form of the Hebrew SnuSu, 
Shash, six. The queen is Malkuth, the tenth Sephira. The three 
inferior worlds are Briah, Yetzirah, and Asiah. See Introduction, 


§§ 57-60.] 

17. And the dignity of dignity hangeth from the 
seven conformations of the cranium. (This is the beard 
of the venerable and Ancient One, which is divided into 
thirteen portions.) 


[The Ancient One is the first Sephira, Macroprosopus, as I 
have before remarked. The beard, in continuation of the symbolic 
representation of the head, is divided into thirteen portions, which 
answer by Gematria (see Introduction, § 11) to the idea of unity. 
For ACHD, Achad, unity, yields the number 13 by numerical 
value. | 


18. And the second earth came not into the computa- 
tion. (That is, the kingdom of the restored world, which 
elsewhere is called the Bride of Microprosopus, came not 
into the computation when the six members were said to 
be created. Or otherwise, when in Genesis iv. 2 it is 
said in another way, “ And the earth," that earth is not 
to be understood of which mention hath been first made ; 
since by the first is to be understood the kingdom of the 
restored world, and by the second the kingdom of the 
destroyed world), and this is elsewhere said. 

[The kingdom of the destroyed world is that of unbalanced 
force. (See Introduction, δὺ 41 and τό, and also note Section 3, 


foregoing.) This refers to a period prior to the development of the 
Sephiroth, and must therefore be referable to the Edomite kings. ] 


48 KABBALAH. 


I9. And it hath proceeded out of that which hath 
undergone the curse, as it is written in Genesis v. 29, 
“From the earth which the Lord hath cursed.” (The 
meaning is: That the kingdom of the restored world 
was formed from the kingdom of the destroyed world, 
wherein seven kings had died and their possessions had 
been broken up. Or, the explanation of the world, of 
which mention is made elsewhere, proceedeth from the 
kingdom of the destroyed world. 

[These seven kings are the Edomite kings before mentioned in 
section 3. | 


20. It was formless and void, and darkness upon the 
face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Elohim vibrating 
upon the face of the waters. Thirteen (these words, 
from “it was formless” down to “of the waters,’ are 
thirteen in the Hebrew text of Genesis) depend from 
the thirteen (forms) of the dignity of dignity (that is, 
the beard of the Macroprosopus, or first formed head.) 

[I have before remarked that the number thirteen expresses 
unity. The author of * The Book of Concealed Mystery" here 
argues that the very number and order of the words in the Hebrew 
text refer to certain forms of the Deity. The terms “face of the 
deep" and “face of the waters" bear a striking analogy to 
Macroprosopus and Microproscpus, the Vast and the Lesser Coun- 
tenances. ln this sense the “face of (from) the deep (abyss)” is 


the countenance formed from Ain Soph, the Limitless One; namely, 
the first Sephira, the Crown Kether. | 


21. Six thousand years depend from the six first. This 
is what the wise have said, that the world shall last six 
thousand years, and it is understood from the six num- 
bers of Microprosopus. But also the six following words 
give occasion to this idea: VIAMR ALHIM ΤΗΙ AVR 
VIHI AVR, Veyomar Elohim Yehi Aur Vayehi Aur : “ And 
the Elohim said, Let there be light, and there was light.” 


[By an exegetical rule of numbers, not so often employed as the 
others, simple numbers or units signify divinethings ; numbers of ten, 
celestial things; numbers of a hundred, terrestrial things; and 


THE 2OOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 49 


thousands signify the future, what'shall be in an after-age. Hence 
are the “six thousand years” deduced from the six first words; 
which also are said to refer to the six Sephiroth of whom Micro- 
prosopus is formed; the idea of six being extended into as many 
thousands, to symbolize that number on the plane of a future age.] 


22. The seventh (the millennium, and the seventh 
space, namely, the Kingdom), above that One which 
alone is powerful—(1.e., when the six degrees of the mem- 
bers denote mercies and judgments, the seventh degree 
tendeth alone to judgment and rigour). And the whole 
is desolate (that is, the Kingdom, MLKVTH, Malkuth, 
in the higher powers, is the antitype of the sanctuary, 
and like as this is destroyed, so also the Schechinah, or 
Kingdom, is itself exiled) for twelve hours (for the 
Hebrews include all this time of their exile in the space 
of one day). Like as it is written: “ It was formless and 
void, &c." (for from the word “it was formless,” down to 
“upon the faces of," are twelve words in the Hebrew 
text of Genesis.) 

[By the same rule, the millennium is deduced from the seventh 
word. The seventh space here means Malkuth, the kingdom, or 
the queen, which together with the six of Microprosopus, makes. 
up the seven lower Sephiroth. (See Introduction, § 77, further, for 
the idea of the balance of mercy and judgment.)] 


23. The thirteenth (that is, “of the waters,” HMIM, 
Hamim, which is the thirteenth word) raiseth up these 
(that is, as well the sanctuary which is above as that 
which is below) through mercy (since the water sym- 
bolizeth that measure of mercy through which judgment 
and punishments are mitigated), and they are renewed 
as before (for the six words follow afresh, as in the be- 
ginning the six members are enumerated). For all those 
six continue and stand fast (they are the members of 
the Microprosopus, and are not as his bride, and from 
them is the restitution), since it is written BRA, Bera, 
“created” (which hath a sense of permanence), and then 
it is written HITHH, Hayitha, “it was” (which also is a 

E 


50 KABBALAH. 


phrase of permanence and not of interpolation), for it is 
very truth (plainly, therefore, the kingdom perished not, 
although it might be formless and void, but it retaineth 
hitherto the essence). 


[Mercy and judgment are opposites, and from;the side of judg- 
ment comes the execution of judgment, which is destruction. ] 


24. And at the end of the Formless and the Void and 
the Darkness (that is, at the end of the exile this saying 
shall have place: Isa. ii. 11). And the Tetragrammaton 
alone shall be exalted in that day (that is, in the time of 
Messiah). 

[The Tetragrammaton (see Introduction, § 67) comprehends the 
whole ten Sephiroth, and consequently expresses their three trini- 
ties of balanced force also; consequently, when the Tetragram- 


maton appears, the formless and the void and the darkness dis- 
appear, and form, fulness, and light replace them.] 


25. Dut there are excavations of excavations. (The 
excavation 1s the receptacle, like that which 1s hollowed out, 
or carved out, like a cave, or any other receptacle. There- 
fore all receptacles are inferior with respect to the superiors, 
among which the “ shells” hold the last place, which here 
are described, which are) under the form of a vast serpent 
extending this way and that. (Concerning this serpent the 
author of the * Royal Valley " speaks thus in his “ Trea- 
tise of the Shells.” The fragments of the receptacles, which 
have fallen into the world of Creation, of Formation, and 
of Action, therein exist from the Outer; and judgments 
are more consonant to these, which are called profane, 
and have their habitation in the middle space between 
the Holy and the Unclean. And from the head is formed 
that great dragon which is in the sea, and is the sea- 
serpent, which is, however, not so harmful as the earthly 
one. And this dragon hath been castrated since his 
crest (or membrum genitale), together with his mate, have 
been repressed, and thence have been formed four hundred 
desirable worlds. And this dragon hath in his head a 


ASIAH. 


YETZIRAH. 


BRIAH. 


ATZILOTH. 


ap dn f^ T Sung 
)2p2[ ο... Urip jg 
0393 ΗΟ HVufaa 
+t κ 
νερὰ Hanppe 
D Bi ΤΝ. ΓΞ 
᾿ΗΥΙΜΧΟΗΩ «κά Ü HVNIG 
c € 
κ Jggoy cunweaq 
WMD 1242/22) -nDI yg ipsu 
H23H.L3M 
| 
ER. Js J 
HIfUMTVW 
ΟΙ 
(7914482) 
11119 
αἄσδαλ 
6 
uyopup p (proydpy i 
ary OTT SEs, IYO] WIG 
“HOW ZLAN - ; QOH 
Ζ Ὁ 
(2;»{91]0) 
Uu κα "d 
ΠΠ αμα] 
9 
(2.23 γόης") (nune h 
MJ PULYISOY D NNN LL LIAS! 
ὭΞΕΞΠΩ F1 HVunaio9 
+ B 
{10155322 / 
2441 {121} {41 |" = Τ.Κ 
HYWHOHD HYNIG 
τ΄ E 
UONDIYIJALY ΟΡ) ΟΙ JO INOS 
“HINWT VW 
OI 
poligrey 
αοδαα 
6 
orum LY 72224211 
“HOVZLAN ‘OOH 
P2 Q 
VIO PPI “ῥ2 27 {71} 
QO393H2 "HvHfna3ai9 
25 S 
TAGU -yothydvzy 
"HVWXOHO i HVNI&S 
E e 
i E 
'ov€uoymauj;opnre 40 uos] ogopt7 
«ή 3] ο. X 
YPN! genaopp 
HLAM TY MW 
0] 
umi GA 40 ΗΛ: 
OSIA 
6 Tm 
YIOPYDZ, "Ο/Η ΑΙ) κ. πει 
“HOWZLAN "— σσ “OOH 
Ζ 8 
ΕΕ popu 4o WOU PI 
HLSYAHdIL 
x 9 
ή z 777a Jogin nnyo 
'ü3$3H9 TEM —— ———— HVUuUna3a9 
ub g g 
T "-— 
HOPU HAD DALIT ao wn niyoj ΩΙ 40 1204 At P204 
* H V W M ΠΗΏ PO Ἂμ HYNIG 
7 € 
im com P 
- prey y 
43 Hila 


ft σι] 


SUOLI AO SIJAS AU J 
HLOHAITO 


"Spits 2] M 
ΟΡΟ IL MOJON 
Hl NDIA VW 


mad OOTY 


: tf 25.42 ri 


GOSIA 


6 
SMI A KK MANIA nt 
up» n» OV MS τ e ο 5 y E 
HOVZLI3N ja COH 
£ 8 
UD: 
USIWMIY s 


H.L3H3Hdl. 
9 


“SQ1THYOM YNOA AHL NI HLOYIHdAS BAHL 
SO NOISSINSNVYL ANY NOILd303H JHL INIMOHS 
ατα. 


[In Exeliels Vision, the Appearance of a. Man 


eatures) 


- 


asion, lhe Living CO 


P 


zekrels | 


Late 
4 


UAA 


nent) 


» 
+ 


Irma 


X 


4C 


els m lhe F 


(Ii £zekr 


(In Ezektels Vision, the Throne) 


| 


ο ROOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 5r 


nostril (after the manner of whales) in order that he may 
receive influence, and in himself he containeth all other 
dragons, concerning which it is said: “ Thou hast broken 
the heads of the dragons upon the waters” (Ps. xxiv. 
I3). And here the idea or universal form of all the shells 
is understood, which encompasseth the seven inferior 
emanations of the queen after the manner ofa serpent, as 
well from the right as from the left and from every side.) 


[The excavation or receptacle of a Sephira is that quality 
whereby it receives the supernal influence from that which imme- 
diately precedes it; hence each Sephira has a double quality of 
receiving and of transmitting, which passes through the four 
worlds, in each of which the Sephiroth exist, though in graduaily 
decreasing light. (See Table subjoined.) The “ shells,” Qliphoth, 
are the demons, in whom again is a form of the Sephiroth, 
distorted and averse. This great dragon which is here described 
is evidently identical with the leviathan of Job. He is the 
executor of judgment, the centripetal force, the old serpent ever 
seeking to penetrate into Paradise; finally, in a more exoteric sense, 
he is Satan and the devil, the accusing one. In the Sepher Yetzirah, 
a most important qabalistical book, he is called Theli, THLI, the 
dragon. Now, by Gematria, TuLI = 400+ 30+ 10 = 440; and 
if we “repress his crest ”—i.e., take away the first letter, which is 
Tu, Lau—4oo, there will remain LI = 40 = M, Mem, the water. 
The “400 desirable worlds” are the numerical value of Tu, and 
signify the power of the 'l'etragrammaton on the material plane 
(See note to section 21, foregoing.) There is much alchemical 
symbolism contained in the * Siphra Dtzenioutha." The “Seven 
Inferior Emanations " of the queen, are the seven lower Sephiroth 
—viz., Chesed, Geburah, Tiphereth, Netzach, Hod, Yesod, and 
Malkuth; or Microprosopus and his bride, the king and queen. 
* Shells,” Qliphoth, are the evil spirits. ] 


26. His tail is in his head (that is, he holdeth his tail 
in his mouth, in order that he may form a circle, since 
he is said to encompass holiness). He transferreth his 
head to behind the shoulders (that 1s, he raiseth his head 
at the back of the bride of Microprosopus, where is the 
place of most severe judgments), and he is despised (since in 
him is the extremity of judgments and severities, whence 
wrath is the attribute of his forms). He watcheth (that 

E 2 


52 KABBALAH. 


is, he accurately searcheth out and seeketh in what place 
he may gain an entry into holiness). And he is con- 
cealed (as if laying traps; since he insinuateth himself 
into the inferiors, by whose sins he hath access to the 
holy grades, where the carrying out of judgments is 
committed to him). He is manifested in one of the 
thousand shorter days. (Numbers are called days, 
and numbers of the inferior world short days; among 
which tens are attributed to the factive, on account of 
their decimal numeration; hundreds to the formative, 
since they are numbers of the light of their author, and 
draw their existence from the tens; but thousands to the 
creative, for the same reason. But that dragon hath 
about this his most powerful location, whence, if a defect 
occurreth only in one numeration of that system through 
the fault of the inferiors, he is immediately manifest, and 
thus commenceth his accusations before the throne of 
glory.) 

[Here is the origin of the well-known symbol of a serpent 
holding his tail in his mouth, like a circle—the serpent of Saturn. 
' The reason that he raiseth his head behind the shoulders of the 
bride (Malkuth) 1s because he 1s, so to speak, not only the executor 
of judgment, but also the destroyer; destruction as opposed to 
creation, death as opposed to life. For the whole Sephiroth are 
represented as being the balance of mercy and justice, and the 
tenth Sephira is especially of the nature of justice, as also is 
Geburah, the fifth. He is concealed, because he is not called into 
action till justice requires him. The term “decimal numeration ” 
of course refers to the ten Sephiroth. The presence of the serpent 
when revealed, is an accusation, because it shows that the balance 
is destroyed; just as in.a watch, if one of the wheels be injured; 
irregularity is at once manifested. Now, life, when it consists of 
birth into ancther form, necessarily implies death in the previous 
form. The throne of glory is the Briatic world. ] 


27. There are swellings in his scales (that is, like as 
in a crocodile; because great in him is the heaping to- 
gether of judgments). His crest keepeth its own place 
(that is, there is in him no further power of hastening 
to things beyond in the Outer), 


ΙΙ. OF GONCLZALED MYSTERY. 53 


[There is in the destroyer no “hastening to the outer," 
because he is centripetal and not cenirifugal.] 


28. But his head is broken by the waters of the great 
sea. (The great sea is wisdom, the fountain of mercy 
and loving-kindness; which, if it sendeth down its in- 
fluence, judgments are pacified, and the hurtful power of 
the shells is restricted) ; like as it is written, Ps. Ixxiv. 
I3: “Thou hast broken the heads of the dragons by 
the waters." 

[*'The waters of the great sea," are the influence of the 


supernal mother, Binah, of whom Malkuth is the reflection. But 
Binah receives the influence of Chokmah. See Introduction.] 


29. They were two (male and female, whence the 
text of the Psalm speaketh of the dragons in the plural 
number; but when the plural number is given in its 
least form, two only are understood). They are reduced 
into one (for the female leviathan hath been slain, lest 
they should seek to multiply judgments) Whence the 
word THNINM, TZhenanim (in the  before-mentioned 
passage of the Psalm), is written in a defective form 
(purposely to denote that restriction). 


[I may refer the reader to the Talmud for further information 
regarding Jewish ideas of the Leviathan. Thenanim is written in a 
defective form, because the letter I of the plural is omitted. 
Written fully, it should be THNINIM, instead of Tu NINM.] 


30. (But it is said) heads (in the plural number, for 
the purpose of denoting a vast multitude, as well of species 
as of individuals in that genus); like as it is written, 
Ezek. i. 22: “ And a likeness, as a firmament, above the 
heads of the living creature.” (Where also the word 
living creature, CHIH, Chiah, is put in the singular as a 
genus of angels; and heads in the plural for the purpose 
of denoting species and innumerable individuals.) 

[^ Thou hast broken the heads of the dragons (Thenanim) by 


the waters." It must be remembered that this dragon 3s said by 
the author of the ** Royal Valley " to be the king of all the “ shells 7 


54 KABBALAH. 


or demons. Now, the demons are divided into ten classes, 
corresponding to the ten Sephiroth, but in an averse form, and are 
called in the book, “ Beth Elohim,” the “impure Sephiroth.” The 
heads of the leviathan (cf. the Lernean Hydra which Hercules 
slew) are probably these. Compare the description of the beast in 
Revelation. | 


31. “And the Elohim said, Let there be light, and 
there was light.” (The sense may be sought from that 
Psalm xxxiii. 9) where it is written, “ Since He Himself 
spake, andit was done." (First, therefore, is commemo- 
rated) the Path HVA, Hoa (that is, the mother of 
understanding, who is called ALHIM, Zlohim, near the 
beginning of the verse, * And the Elohim said." She also 
is called HVA, Hoa, in the words of Psalm xxxiii. 9, 
on account of her truly secret nature) is alone (as 
well with Moses as with David). The word VIHI, 
Vayehi, * and it was done,” is also alone. (As if the six 
members were considered separately, seeing that V, Vau 
occupieth the first place in the word VIHI, Vayehi. 

[This statement, that the supernal mother is symbolized by 
the word Hoa, He, seems at first sight at variance with the state- 
ment in another place, that Hoa represents Macroprosopus. But the 
letter H in the Tetragrammaton symbolizes the supernal mother, 
and this is also the initial letter of Hoa. And again by Gematria 
(see Introduction) Hoa, HVA=5+6+1=12, and the digits of 12 
1+2=3. And 3symbolizes Binah because she is the third Sephira. 
‘Seeing that V, Vau, occupies the first place in the word VIHI," 


because V stands for the number 6. See Table of the Alphabet; 
&c., in Introduction. ]; 


32. Then are the letters inverted, and become one. (If, 
namely, in the word VIHI, Vayehi, the letters I, Yod, and 
H, He, be placed in front so that it may read IHVI, 
Yahevi,it maketh one Tetragrammaton, which exhausteth 
the whole Divinity. But since these belong to the 
mother, from whom arise the judgments, hence this 
tetragrammaton is here written in retrograde order, which 
mode of writing is referred by qabalists to the judgments, 
on account of the nature of averse things; whence this 


fee BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 55 


ought to be written in this way: IHVI, Yahen, IHV, 
Yeho, IH, Yah, I, Yod.  Butsince in the path of under- 
standing those judgments themselves do not exist, but 
only their roots, while in itself this path is only pure 
mercy ; hence the retrograde order is inverted, in order 
that ib may be posited entire in this manner as at first) : 
' ών, υυ αν Yeho, LIHVI, Yahevi. (But it is 
not written in the usual manner, IHVH, Yod, He, Vau, 
He ; because the word is derived from VIHI, Vayehi, 
whose metathesis is here discussed. And nevertheless the 
letter) which is last (namely, I, Yod, which is put in the 
place of the last H, He, in the ordinary form of the Te- 
tragrammaton, denoteth), the Schechinah (or the queenly 
presence) which is below (that is, a path of the kingdom, 
namely, MLKV Tn, Malkuth, the tenth and last Sephira) ; 
like as (in the other instance) the letter H, He, is found 
to be the Schechinah. 


(The reader will be utterly unable to follow the reasoning in this 
section, unless he reads carefully what I have said in the Introduc- 
tion concerning the Literal Qabalah under the heads of Notariqon 
and Temurah, to which therefore I refer him. Any four-lettered 
name is of course a tetragrammaton, but this term is especially 
applied to the word of four letters called by biblical translators 
Jehovah. It must be remembered that the natural course of 
writing Hebrew and Chaldee is from right to left, and that when it 
is written from left to right, it 1s said to be written “ backwards," 
“in retrograde order," or “averse.” By the “path of under- 
standing ” is meant Binah, the third Sephira. Schechinah is of 
course the Divine Presence manifested in the path of Malkuth. T 
have explained in the Introduction the meaning of the term “ path’ 
as employed in the Zohar. | 


33. But in one balance are they equiponderated. (The 
balance denoteth the male and the female; and the 
meaning is, that the letters I, Yod, and H, He—of which 
the former is masculine and referreth to the path of the 
foundation; and the latteris feminine, pertaining to the 
queen—are interchangeable ; since whilst the equilibrium 
existeth there is an intercommunication between them, 


56 KABBALAH. 


and they are joined togetheras one. Add to this that the 
queen is also called ADNI, Adonai, wherein the letter I, 
Yod, bringeth up the rearguard of the army, as it were ; 
because also it is accustomed to be called the Lesser 
Wisdom.) And the living creatures rush forth and 
return. (This is what is said in Ezek. 1. I4 concerning 
the living creatures, which is accustomed to be said con- 
cerning those letters of the Tetragrammaton, which some- 
times hold the last place and sometimes the first; as 
when I, Yod, rusheth forth unto the last place, and when 
it returneth unto the beginning again; and so also the 
letter H, He. Likewise, then, also the living creatures are 
said to rush forth, when the Tetragrammaton is written 
with the final H, He, because then the whole system 
of emanatives is exhausted. But they are said to return 
when the Tetragrammaton is written with the final I, Yod, 
so that the sense may be collected in such a manner as 
to return from the last path of the queen into the 
penultimate of the foundation, which is designated by 
this letter I, Yod. 


[I have defined * balance " in the Introduction, § 29, which see. 
The * path of the foundation " is of course Yesod, the ninth Sephira, 
while the queen is Malkuth, the tenth. Yesod is therefore the 
connecting link between Microprosopus and the bride. The letter 
I “bringeth up the rearguard as it were" in the name ADNI, 
Adonai, because it is the last letter. Ezek. 1. 14: the Qabalists 
by the term CuIVTu HQDSu, Chaioth Ha-Qadesch, the Holy 
Living-Creatures, understand the letters of the Tetragrammaton. 
With regard to the “letters of the Tetragrammaion, which sometimes 
hold the last place and sometimes the first,” the following are two 
examples—namely, as in the form LHVI, Yod, He, Vau, Yod, the 
letter I, Yod, is both at the beginning and end of the word; and 
in the form which is more usual IHVH, Yod, He, Vau, He, the 
letter H, He, is in the second and last place. ] 


34. Like as it is written: ‘‘ And the Elohim saw the 
substance of the light, that it was good.” (Here a 
reason is adduced from the proposed text itself, showing 
how the last letter of this form of the Tetragrammaton, 
namely, I, Yod, may be said to symbolize the bride, since 


TAHE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 57 


God himself might behold in that light the path of con- 
junctive foundation, which the word “ goodness” pointeth 
out; but when the foundation is in the act of conjunc- 
tion—that is, under the idea of communicating goodness 
—there then is the bride. But also that the word 
* goodness" denoteth the foundation is proved from 
Isa. iii. 10, where it is said) “Say ye unto the 
righteous man" (that is, to the path of foundation, 
because the first man is said to be the foundation of the 
world, Prov. x. 25), “that it shall be well with him." 
Therefore, then, do they ascend within the equilibrium. 
(That is, these two letters, I, Yod, and H, He, mean one 
and the same thing. Or again: But behold, how in 
balanced power ascend the letters of Tetragrammaton. 
That is, how those letters agree when in conjunction, 
which before were standing separated in the word VIHI, 
Vayeha.) 

[The “path of foundation" is of course the ninth Sephira, 
Yesod, which is the sixth member of Microprosopus (see section 16, 
foregoing), and typifies reproductive power. Malkuth is the queen. 
We must remember that in the Tetragrammaton, IH VH, I, Yod, 
is the father (who is not Macroprosopus, though he is implied 
therein, as the top point of the Hebrew letter Yod is said to 
symbolize him); H, He, the supernal mother; V, Vau, the son 
(Mieroprosopus); and H, He, final, the bride (the queen). And 
this is their proper order. Othervariations of the Tetragrammaton, 
therefore, alter the position of the letters with regard to each other ; 
their normal and correct position being ΤΗΥ Η.] 


35. (Whilst the spouse, Microprosopus) was at first 
alone (he was standing by, whilst the letter V, Vaw, occu- 
pied the first place, then was he separated from his bride). 
But all things returned into the unity. (That is, not 
only were father and mother conjoined into one, because 
the two letters, I, Yod, and H, Ze, were combined; but 
also the Microprosopus returned to his bride, whilst V, 
Vau, was placed next to I, Yod, in the Tetragrammaton, 
IHVI, Yahevi. For) V, Vau, descendeth (when in the word 
VIHI, Vayehi, “and it was done,’ it occupieth the first 


58 KABBALAH. 


place; but in the proposed metathesis, it descended into the 
third place, in order that it might be JH VI, Yahevi). And 
they are bound together the one to the other (male and 
female, V, Vau, and I, Yod, the path of beauty and the 
queen), namely, I, Yod, and H, He (by which are shown 
wisdom and knowledge, father and mother), like unto 
two lovers who embrace each other. (By two lovers are 
understood either V, Vau, and I, Yod only—that is, at 
the end; or I, Yod, and H, He, together—that is, at the 
beginning). 

[The “path of beauty," or Tiphereth, the sixth Sephira, is 
sometimes represented by V, Vau, and therefore sometimes stands 
for Microprosopus by itself; it is really the central Sephira of the 


group of six Sephiroth which compose him. The numerical value 
of Vau 1s 6.] 


36. (Now the author of the * Siphra Dtzenioutha" 
hasteneth to the latter explanation of these letters, 
I, Yod, and V, Vau; and concerning V, Vau, he 
saith): Six members are produced from the branch 
of the root of his body. (The body is Microprosopus ; 
the root of the body is the mother, who is symbolized by 
the letter H, He ; the branch of the root is the letter V, 
Vau, enclosed and hidden within the letter H, He; and 
from that very branch were produced the six members— 


that is, the entire letter V, Vau, now having obtained 
the head.) 


[The mother here mentioned is of course the third Sephira, 
Binah. The six members of Microprosopus forming the entire 
letter Vau is an allusion to the numerical value of that letter 
being 6.] 


37. “The tongue speaketh great things” (see Dan. 
vii. 8. And by the tongue is understood the foundation 
—namely, the letter I, Yod, joined with his bride; the 
speech is the marital influx flowing forth from the 
bride; for the queen is called the word; but the great 
things are the inferiors of all grades produced.) 


Γι OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 59r 


[The inferiors of all “grades” or “paths” are the Sephiroth 
in the inferior worlds.] 


38. This tongue is hidden between I, Yod, and H, He. 
(For father and mother are perpetually conjoined in 
ISVD, Yesod, the foundation, but concealed under the 
mystery of Daath or of knowledge.) 

[The conjunction of the letters V and H at the end of the 
Tetragrammaton IHVH is similar to that of I and H at the 
beginning.] 


39. Because it is written (Isa. xliv. 5): “ That man 
shall say, I am of the Tetragrammaton." (The word 
ANI, Ani, I, when the discourse is concerning judg- 
ments, pertaineth to the queen. But whensoever mercy 
is introduced it referreth to the understanding, like as 
in this place. In order that the sense may be: The 
supernal path, which is called I, or the understanding in 
act of conjunction with the father, is for the purpose of 
the formation of the Tetragrammaton, and this is one 
conjunction between the father and the mother for the 
constitution of the six members.) And that shall be 
called by the name Jacob, IOQB, Yaqob. (To call by 
name is to preserve; and another conjunction of father 
and mother is introduced for the purpose of preserving 
the Microprosopus, which is called Jacob.) And that 
man shall write with his hand, *I am the Lord's." (To 
write belongeth to the written law, or the beautiful path, 
and the same also signifieth to flow in. ‘‘ With his 
hand," BIDV, Byodo, is by metathesis BIVD, Byod, by 
1, Yod—that is, through the foundation ; in order that the 
sense may be, it may be formed from his influx, so that 
the Tetragrammaton may be written with I, Yod, as we 
have above said.) And by the name of Israel shall he 
call himself. He shall call himself thus in truth. (For 
the conception of the Microprosopus is more properly 
under the name of Jacob, whose wife is Rachel; and his 
cognomen, as it were, is Israel, whose wife is Leah.) 


6ο KABBALAH. 


[The understanding is Binan, the third Sephira, which : 


a 


referred to the supernal H, He, The “beautiful path” is 
Tiphereth, the sixth. The foundation is Yesod, the ninth. It is 
the final Yod, I, of the form of the Tetragrammaton IH VI, which 
is referred to Yesod, and not the initial, which belongs to Chokmah, 
the second Sephira, the Father. ] 


40. That man shall say, I am the Lord’s; he de- 
scendeth. (That is: that very conception of the word 
I, which is elsewhere attributed to the supernal mother, 
forasmuch as in her agree the three letters of the word 
ANI, Ani, I; namely A, Aleph, is the highest crown; 
N, Nun, is the understanding itself, in its fifty celebrated 
gates; I, Yod, is the foundation or knowledge of the 
Father; but in this instance it is attributed to the 
lowest grade of the lower mother, and now is ADNI, 
Adonai, without the D, Daleth, D, or poverty, but filled 
with the influx, and is ANI, Anz.) And all things are 
called BIDV, Byodo (that is, all these things are applied 
to IVD, Yod, concerning which this discourse is.) All 
things cohere by the tongue, which is concealed in the 
mother. (That 15, through Daath, or knowledge, whereby 
wisdom is combined with the understanding, and the 
beautiful path with his bride the queen; and this is the 
concealed idea, or soul, pervading the whole emanation.) 
Since this is opened for that which proceedeth from 
itself (that is, Daath is itself the beautiful path, but also 
the inner, whereto Moses referreth ; and that path heth 
hid within the mother, and is the medium of its con- 
junction. But whensoever it is considered in the outer. 
when it hath come forth from the mother, then is it 
called Jacob.) 

[The reader is referred to the Introduction for the names, &c., 
of the Sephiroth. Nun in its fifty gates refers to the numerical 
value of the letter N, which is 50. The “lower mother” is of 
course the final H of the word IHVH, the “bride” Daath 


generally symbolizes the conjunction of the second and third 
Sephiroth. ] 


41. (And herein ΤΗΥ. Yod, He, Vau, differeth from 


di 


ου OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. Or 


the whole name and from all the four letters. Now, he 
turneth back to the other portion of the four—namely, 
ΤΗΥ, Yod, He, Vau—and saith:) The Father resideth in 
the beginning (that is, that the letter I, Yod, which is the 
symbol of the wisdom and of the father, in that part 
holdeth the first place,.like as in the whole system: 
since the crown nevertheless is hidden, and is only com- 
pared to the highest apex of the letter I, Yod). The 
mother in the middle (for the letter H, He, which is 
the symbol of the unformed understanding and the 
supernal mother, holdeth the middle. place between I, 
Yod, and V, Vaw, even asin the supernals she is com- 
prehended by the Father from above, and by the Micro- 
prosopus, which is her son, she is covered from below, in 
whom she sendeth herself downward into the path of 
Hod, or of glory.) And she is covered on this side and 
on that (by the two, father and son). Woe, woe 
unto him who revealeth their nakedness! (Since this 
can be done by the faults of the inferiors, so that Micro- 
prosopus loseth this influx, whereby he is of so great 
power that he can seek to enshroud his mother; for that 
covering isthe reception of the supernal influx, and the 
capability of transmitting the same to the inferiors, 
which cannot be done if the mother be uncovered and 
taken away from the Microprosopus, as the Israehtes did 
when they committed the sin of the calf.) 

[LH V is of course the Tetragrammaton without the final H. 
It is interesting to note that in the qabalistical work called the 
“ Sepher Yetzirah,” this trigrammatic name is used instead of the 
Tetragrammaton. The crown which is hidden is Kether, the first 
Sephira, or Macroprosopus, who is AHIH, and is therefore not 
openly shown in IHVH. The path of Hod is the eighth Sephira. 
The father and the son, by whom the mother is enclosed, are of 
course the letters I and V in the word ΤΗΥ. With regard to what 
is said regarding the Israelites when they committed the sin of the 
calf, I imagine that it is intended to intimate—(a) That the calf 
was a symbol of ALHIM, Elohim, not of IH VH ; for the Israelites 
had said, * Make us Elohim to go before us." (b) That this name 
“ Elohim " is applied to the feminine portion of the Tetragramma- 


62 KABBALAH, 


ton HH. (c) That therefore the force was unbalanced which 
they adored, and that it would have been just as wrong to adore 
IV alone. ] 


42. And God said, Let there be MARTH, Λαγού, 
lights in the firmament of the heaven. (Now he 
hasteneth to the third part of that quadrilateral name, 
namely, to these two letters IH, Yod, He. But by lights 
are understood the sun and the moon, the beautiful 
path and the kingdom or bride. And herein the sense 
is this: although usually by these two letters are accus- 
tomed to be understood the Father and the Mother, or 
the wisdom and the understanding, yet in this place the 
supernal lights are wanting, like as the word MARTE, 
Maroth, is written in a defective form ; and the mean- 
ing is proper to be applied unto the firmament of the 
heaven—that is, to the foundation, extended and prepared 
for marital conjunction; for the spouse is called the 
heaven, and the member of the treaty is the firmament, 
like as, therefore, the two last paths in the whole neme 
IHVI, Yod, He, Vau, Yod are designated by the letters 
V, Vau, and I, Yod, so likewise these in this portion of 
the square are designated by the letters, I Yod, and H, 
He.) The husband hath dominion over the wife (since 
it is not written by V, Vau, but by I, Yod, which is the 
symbol of the member of the treaty, and herein denoteth 
the actual combination with the female): like as it is 
written (Prov. x. 25): “ And the just man is the 
foundation of the world." (By this saying he illustrateth 
his meaning; because by the letter I, Yod, is understood 
the fundamental member by which the world 1s preserved 
in existence.) 

[If the reader refers to the Introduction, he will there find in 
the Table showing the operation of the Sephiroth in the four 
worlds, &c., that in the world of Asiah the sun is referred to 
Tiphereth and the moon to Yesod. Furthermore, the circumstance 
of certain words being written defectively or redundantly is com- 


mented on in the Introduction, ὃ 15. The term “square,” or 
* square name," is sometimes applied to the Tetragrammaton. The 


Geer O0Km OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 63 


phrase “ member of the treaty ” probably alludes to the symbolism 
of circumcision. In this sense, I, Yod, in the path of Yesod, the 
ninth Sephira, has a symbolical phallic signification. | 


43. I, Yod, therefore irradiateth two. (That is, the 
letter I, Yod, in this square of the Tetragrammaton hath 
a double sense of influx, forasmuch as in the first instance 
it signifieth the father who illuminateth the mother; and 
forasmuch as in the second instance it signifieth the 
Microprosopus, or rather his treaty, which illuminateth 
the kingdom.) And (again in another manner) it 
shineth (that is, and also hath a third signification, 
whilst in the complete name it constituteth the last 
letter), and passeth on into the woman. (That is, and 
denoteth the bride of Microprosopus, as is shown above, 
because it is put in the place of the last H, He, of the 
Tetragrammaton IHVH ; like as also it hath the same 
power of signification in the connection of the names of 
existence and domination in this manner, [ACHD, VNHI.) 

44. (Now he turneth to the last part of this square, 
which is I, Yod, alone, and saith), I, Yod, remaineth one 
and alone (in order that it may show that all flow out 
from the one single letter I, Yod, which is in the form 
of a point, yet partaking of three parts, concerning 
which see elsewhere ; yet in this place denoting only the 
woman, or the kingdom, wherein are contained all the 
supernals. ) 

[Yod at the end of the Tetragrammaton denotes the synthesis 
the circular movement by which the end returns to the beginning. 
In the secret qabalistical alphabet ‘known as the “celestial 
alphabet,” Yod is represented by three circles at the angles of an 
equilateral triangle with the apex uppermost. Malkuth, the tenth 
Sephira, of course receives the influx of all the other Sephiroth (see 


"Table showing the reception and transmission of the Sephiroth in 
the four worlds. | 


45. And then Gf now the Tetragrammaton be not 
considered in the manner just described, but in this 
manner of instituting the square, IHVI, IHV, IH, I, 


64 KABBALAH. 


then Yod also is in a certain sense solitary, but in a 
plainly contrary sense. For it ascendeth in its path up- 
wards and upwards. (That is, it doth not so much 
receive the higher sense, in order that it may denote the 
beautiful path or the foundation; but the highest, that 
is, the father or the wisdom.) The woman is again 
hidden. (That is, in this instance, the former meaning 
by which it denoted the bride of Microprosopus, namely, 
the last letter of the above-written form of the 'letra- 
grammaton, ceaseth in itself.) 

[This is in the converse manner. The letter I no longer 


signifies the bride when it ceases to be the final letter of a Tetragram- 
maton. | 


46. And the mother is illuminated (that is, in the 
second part of the ordinary averse Tetragrammaton, 
which consists of the letters IH, to the letter I, Yod, 
which hath the signification of the father, 15 added the 
letter H, He, which is the mother, and because these two 
are combined by themselves, hence that luminous in- 
fluence is denoted wherewith the understanding is im- 
bued by the supernal wisdom); and is opened out into 
her gates (that is, if these two letters be bound closely 
together, then out of the dead the pentad originateth the 
number 50, by which are denoted the fifty gates of the 
understanding ; these are said to be opened because the 
letter H, He, is last and unprotected, not being shut in 
by any other succeeding letter.) 

[This is taking the letters ΤΗ separate from the rest of the 
Tetragrammaton, but themselves conjoined. And as I-—10 and 
H=5, these two conjoined (multiplied together) give N —50. And 
. these are the fifty gates or properties of the understanding. These 
are opened, because in the word IH, Yah, the letter H.is last, not 
being shut in, as by VH. in the Tetragrammaton IH VH, or V in 
the trigram IHV.] 


47. The key is added which containeth six, and 
closeth its gate. (That is, in the third part of this 
averse form, which is IHV, the letter H is not altogether 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 65 


the last; but V, the third letter of the Tetragrammaton, 
closeth it in on the other side, whereby are denoted the 
six members of the Microprosopus, superinvesting the six 
members of the mother in such a manner that her last 
gate, which is the path of glory, HVD, Hod, 15 closed, 
and combined with the remainder, which are—Benignity, 
Severity, Beauty, Victory ; drawing their existence singly 
out of the decad.) 

[In the Trigram ΤΗΥ, V may be called the key, because it 
closeth the fifty gates symbolized by IH, by coming next to H, so 
as to close or shut in that letter between itself and I. By “the 


decad" is meant the ten Sephiroth, which are symbolized by the 
numerical value of I, which is Io. 


48. And it applieth to the inferiors and to this part. 
(Or, as others read, “it applieth to this side and to that.” 
Now, the discourse is concerning the fourth part of the 
square, where the name is complete, whether written as H 
or as I in the last path ; so that, nevertheless, the bride of 
Microprosopus may be added. ‘Therefore on either side 
hath Microprosopus a connecting link, for he super- 
investeth the mother from the supernal part, so that 
he may receive her into himself as his soul; and he 
also again is covered by his bride from the inferior 
-part, so that he in his turn may himself become her 
soul.) 

[The bride, the inferior H, He, is said to be a reflection of 


the mother, the supernal H, He, in the Tetragrammaton; just as 
Microprosopus is said to be the reflection of Macroprosopus.] 


49. Woe unto him who shall open her gate! (The 
gates are said to be paths through which influence 
rusheth forth ; they are said to be closed, because, on the 
other hand, too much influence cannot be taken away 
from the inferiors; wherefore the members are said to 
be overshadowed by the members, so that the light may 
diminish in its transit. But when those very conca- 
tenations and cohibitions of the lights are separated by 

F 


66 KABBALAH. 


the sins of the inferiors, no influx can come into the 
universe in a proper manner.) 

[Following out the symbol of the equilibrium in the Sephiroth, 
the sin of the inferior paths would be the introduction of unbalanced 
force. The reader will at first find a little difficulty in following the 
reasoning of these last few sections, but after reading them over 
once or twice, their meaning will seem clearer to him. |] 


CHAPTER II. 


I. THE beard of truth. (That is, now followeth a 
description. of the beard of  Macroprosopus, and its 
thirteen parts, which are more fully described in the 
* [dra Rabba.”) 

[The beard is the influx which descends from the first Sephira 
through all the others. Macroprosopus is of course, as I have 
fully explained in the Introduction, the first Sephira, Kether, or the 
crown; also called the Ancient One.] 


2. Of the beard mention hath not been made. (The 
correct Mantuan Codex hath this correction, so that the 
word DQNA, Degena, is here inserted in the original text. 
'The meaning is, that Solomon in the * Song of Songs" 
maketh mention of all the other members, but not of the 
beard.) Because this is the ornament of all. (It is 
called an ornament because it covereth the rest, just as a 
garment which ornamenteth the body covereth that. But 
this beard covereth not only the Macroprosopus, but also 
the father and the mother, and descendeth even unto 
‘Microprosopus. Whence, on account of the communica- 
tion of so copious a light, it hath also itself been clothed 
as with a garment with the great reverence of silence.) 

[By this beard, covering “not only Macroprosopus, but also 
the father and the mother," is meant that, while it 1s an important 


attribute of Macroprosopus (who 1s, be it carefully remembered by 
the reader, Eheich, AHIH, and not IHV H, in which latter name he 


Ue COOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 67 


is only alluded to as ‘‘the uppermost point of the letter I, Yod "), 
it also extends through the Sephiroth, for it covers the father and 
the mother (i.e., the second Sephira, Chokmah, wisdom, and the 
third’ Sephira, Binah, understanding, the ΤΗ of IHVH). Thus, 
therefore, though properly speaking a part of AHIA, and not of 
IHVH, it extends through the Tetragrammaton IHVH, for it 
* descendeth even unto Microprosopus,”’ the next six Sephiroth, the 


νο TEVE] 


3. From the ears it proceedeth about the circumference 
of the open space; the white locks ascend and descend. 
Into thirteen portions it is distributed in adornment. 
(Of all these see the explanation in the “Idra Rabba ” 
and “Idra Zuta.”) 


[These thirteen divisions of the beard of Macroprosopus are all 
descanted upon at length in both the “ Greater" and “ Lesser Holy 
Assembly,” in the first mentioned of which a chapter is devoted to 
the consideration of each division. I therefore shall not need to 
enter into the subject here, as the reader will find all the informa- 
tion he requires in the latter part of this volume. By Gematria (see 
Introduction) the word ACuD, Achad, one, unity = 13. The 
beard therefore is a glyph of the unity. ] 


4. Concerning that ornamentation it is written (Jer. 
li. 6): * No man passed through it; and where no man 
dwelt.” Man is without, man is not included therein; 
much less the male. 


[The verse runs in the English version: “ Through a land that 
no man passed through, and where no man dwelt."] 


5. Through thirteen springs are the fountains dis- 
iributed (by which there is an influx upon Microprosopus 
and the inferiors). Four are separately joined together, 
but nine flow upon the body (or, as others read, by 
advice of the correct Mantuan Codex), encircle the garden 
(that is, the Microprosopus). 

[The four, separately joined, probably refer to the four letters 
of the Tetragrammaton, and the nine to the last nine Sephiroth— 
i.e., exclusive of Kether. The garden, or Paradise, is another term 
expressive of the whole Sephirotic system in Atziloth, the arche- 


typal world.] 
F 2 


68 KABBALAKH. 


6. This ornamentation beginneth to be formed before 
the gate of the ears. 

7. It descendeth in beauty into the beginning of the 
lips ; from this beginning into that beginning. 

8. There existeth a path which goeth out beneath the 
two galleries of the nostrils, in order that he may séek to 
pass over transgression; like as it is written, Prov. xix. 
II: “And it is glory to pass over a transgression.” 


[The parting of the moustache on the centre of the upper lip. 
'* It is his glory to pass over a transgression.” | 


9. Beneath the lips the beard goeth about into another 
beginning. 

10. Beneath that another path goeth forth. 

11. It covereth the approaches to the aromatic begin- 
ning which is above. 

I2. Two apples are beheld, to illuminate the lights. 


[The two “apples,” or “ apple-trees,” are the cheeks. Com- 
pare with this the imagery of the Song of Solomon.] 


13. The influence of all floweth down as far as the 
heart (therein hang suspended the superiors and the in- 
feriors). 

14. Among those locks which hang down, none 
shineth forth above another. 

15. The lesser cover the throat like an ornament; the 
greater are restored to perfect proportion. 

I6. The lips are free on every side. Blessed 15 he who 
:shall become the receiver of their kisses. 

17. In that influence cf all stream down thirteen 
drops of most pure balm. 

18. In this influence all things exist and are con- 
-cealed. 

το. At that time, when the seventh month draweth 
nigh, those months shall be found to be thirteen (for in 
the Codex, so often said to be correct, this word THRISR, 
Tharisar, or twelve, is expunged; as if it were then 
shown to be a year of thirteen months, according to the 


αυ ο OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 69. 


number of those thirteen divisions of the influence) in the 
supernal world, and the thirteen gates of mercy are 
opened. At that time (by which principally the day of 
explation is meant, according to that passage of Isaiah, 
lv. 6) : “Seek ye the Lord while He can be found." 

[The “thirteen divisions of the influence in the supernal 
world" are of course these thirteen parts of the beard of Macro- 
prosopus considered in the sense of Atziloth, the archetypal 
world, the habitation of the pure Sephiroth alone: “ Seek ye the 
Lorp while he may be found."] 


20. It is written, Gen. i. 11: * And the Lord said, 
Let the earth bring forth germination; (let there be) 
grass yielding seed.” (If here the word IHI, Yehi, “let 
there be," be inserted, they make nine words.) ‘This is 
that which is written: * And humble your bodies in the 
ninth of the month at even." (This is to be understood 
concerning that time concerning which we have spoken 
above, because then the Lord is to be sought out.) 

[VIAMR ALHIM TaDSuA HARTz DSuA OSuB MZRIO 
ZRO, eight words, to which if IHI be added, we have nine. The 
English version — ' And God said, Letthe earth bring forth grass, 
the herb yielding seed.’’] 


21. (In that passage, Deut. 11. 24, where it is 
written) : “ Adonai Jehovah, thou hast begun to show unto 
Thy servant Thy greatness," the name, Tetragrammaton, 
IHVH existeth perfectly written in its sides. (So that the 
name ADNI, Adonai, denoteth the inferior H, He, from 
the one side; and the points of the name ALHIM, 
Elohim, denote the superior H, 77e, from the other side.) 

[“ In its sides "—1.e., in its aspects. The points are the vowel 
marks. ] 


22. But here in this progermination of the earth it is 
not perfect, because IHI, Yehi (let there be), is not 
written. (But we read it so thatalso these letters do not 
represent a perfect name.) 

23. (But therein is represented to us) the superior 1, 


70 παρ αμα, 


Yod (that is, the mark of supernal mercy, which is that 
most holy Ancient One, as the correct Mantuan Codex 
shows in a marginal note), and the inferior I, Yod 
(that is, the mark of inferior mercy, which is Micro- 
prosopus with the influence which he hath from Macro- 
prosopus, which two II, Yods, are also represented in 
that passage, Gen.ii.7): VIITzR IH VH, Vayeyetsir, Yod, 
He, Vau, He, and Tetragrammaton formed (the supernal) 
I, Yod, (and the inferior I, Yod). 

[The only way that I can possibly see that VIITzR IHVH 
will bear the construction put upon it here is this (in which an 
eminent Hebrew scholar, Mr. Mew, agrees with me): V, Vau, and 
I, Yod, the Yod, ITzR, Yetzer, he formed (namely, the) IH VH, 
Tetragrammaton. In this construction the first letter Yod in the 
word VIITzR is taken as the object of the verb ITzR, and not asa 
pronominal prefix. The most holy Ancient One is the origin of 
Kether in Ain Soph when in the condition of the Ain Soph Aur 
(see Introduction), while the inferior Yod is the symbol of Yesod.] 


24. (But in) IHI (besides) the superior and inferior 
(also existeth) the H, He, between both (like as) a 
connexion of perfection (whereby the influx is derived 
from the Macroprosopus and passed on to the Micro- 
prosopus.) 

25. (Wherefore) it is perfect (since it is this name 
without separation), but it 1s not turned to every side 
(because therein is no symbol of the bride of Micro- 
prosopus) (Therefore) this name 1s taken out from this 
place and planted in another (that is, those letters also 
receive another signification from the inferior paths). 

26. (For) it is written, Gen. ii. 8: “ And the Teima: 
grammaton Elohim planted." (Whereby is understood) 
that H, He, which is between the two II, Yods, of the 
word IHI, Yehi, which in the supernals is) the position 
of the nose of the more Ancient One over the Micro- 
prosopus (concerning which see further in the “Idra 
Rabba,” ἃ 175). (For this) existeth not without the 
spirit. 

[For this H, He, symbolized in Elohim, is rather the supernal 


TamewnOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 71 


316 alone, than either the inferior He alone, or both conjoined. The 
nose of Macroprosopus is said in the “Idra Rabba" to be life in 
every part—.e., it, the life, existeth not therefore without the 
influx of the spirit which rusheth forth therefrom. (See ante, 


Chapter I. § 15.) 


27. Through H, He, therefore, it is perfected (rather 
by reason of the mother than by reason of the bride, of 
whom it is the soul) For the one H, He, is above 
(namely, designating the first understanding of the 
Tetragrammaton; and the other is) the H, He, below 
(denoting the queen and the bride). 

28. Like as it is written, Jer. xxxii. 17: AHH ADNI 
IHVH, Ahah, Adonai, Yod He Vaw He: “ Ah, Lord 
Jehovah," &c., where there is a cohesion of the connecting 
links (that is, in the word AHH, Ahah, those two HH, 
He's, are combined which elsewhere are the media of the 
connecting path). For by the spirit is made the con- 
nection of the balanced equilibria (that is, of the 
combinations as well of the father and mother as of the 
Microprosopus and his bride). 

29. (Now the author of the “Siphra Dtzenioutha " 
descendeth to the inferior paths, leaving out Macro- 
prosopus, and examineth the name IHV, Yod He Vau. 
In this are represented father and mother and Micro- 
prosopus. And first occurreth) the supernal I, Yod (the 
symbol of the father), which is crowned with the crown 
of the more Ancient One (that is, whose highest apex 
denoteth the highest crown, or Macroprosopus; or, 
according to another reading of the passage, ‘ which is 
surrounded by the secret things "—that is, by the in- 
fluence or beard of Macroprosopus, which covereth both 
the father and the mother). It is that membrane of the 
supernal brain which, on account of its excellency, both 
shineth and is concealed. (Concerning this matter 
further, see the “ Idra Rabba,” § 58.) 

30. The supernal H, He (then presenteth itself), 
which is surrounded by the spirit which rusheth forth 


72 KABBALAH. 


from the entrances of the galleries (or the nostrils of 
Macroprosopus), that it may give life to all things. 

31. The supernal V, Vau, is that tremendous flashing 
flame (which is the beginning of judgment, seeing that 
doubtless hitherto the Microprosopus existeth in the 
mother) which is surrounded by its crown (namely, the 
mother). 

32. And after are the letters taken in extended form 
(so that this name is written at length, in this manner : 
VV, Pau, HH, He, IVD, Yod, which form, when it is 
perfect, is usually called BN, Ben, because its numera- 
tion is 52), and in Microprosopus are they comprehended 
(seeing that then he embraceth his bride). 


[See Introduction, page 33, Table showing the writing of the 
Tetragrammaton in the four worlds. | 


33. When (this form) beginneth, they are discovered 
in the cranium (namely, these letters, and therein are 
they distributed in the most supernal part of Macro- 
prosopus). 

[^In the cranium” (or skull), BGVLGLT#A, Begolgoltha, or 
in Golgoltha. Inthe New Testament it is worthy of note that Jesus 
Christ (the Son) is said to be crucified at Golgotha (the skull); 


while here, in the Qabalah, Microprosopus (the Son), as the Tetra- 
grammaton, is said to be extended in the form of a cross, thus— 


μας Lom || 


—in Golgotha (the skull) The text above says, at the end of 
section 33, “ of Macroprosopus”; but I think this is a misprint for 
* of Microprosopus-"] 


34. Thence are they extended throughout his whole 
form (from the original benignity), even to the founda- 
tion of all things (namely, as the soul of the inferiors). 


ae LOCK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 73 


35. When it is balanced in the pure equilibrium 
(that is, when the white locks of the most holy Ancient 
One send down the lights or names) then are those 
letters equilibrated. (That is, from their virtue cometh 
the light.) 

tlhe “lights or names” are the ten Sephiroth and the 
Divine names associated with them (see Introduction), which are 
(with the exception of the first Sephira) comprehended in the 
Tetragrammaton ΙΠΥΗ.] 


36. When he is manifested in Microprosopus (namely, 
Macroprosopus), in him are those letters, and by them 
is he named. 

37. IVD, Yod, of the Ancient One, is hidden in its 
origin (that is, the father, who is usually symbolized 
by I, Yod, and is himself also called the Ancient One, is 
shrouded by the beard of Macroprosopus; or otherwise. 
Instead of that manner in which the other two letters 
duplicate their literal parts—e.7., HH and VV—I, Yod, 
by reason of his very nature, cannot be expressed by this 
duplication, but remaineth one and alone), because the 
name is not found ; that is, because if II be put, it can 
no longer be pronounced as I, Yod ; therefore is it written 
IYD). 

[The “Ancient One” is one of the titles of Macroprosopus, 
the first Sephira. But the letter I, Yod, of the Tetragrammaton 


is referred to the second Sephira, Chokinah, which is also called 
the Father. See Introduction, § 67.] 


38. HA, He, is extended by another (He, as it is 
written HH in open and plain writing; but also it is 
sometimes written in another way, HI, also HA; the 
one in the name OB, Awd, the other in the name MH, 
Mah), and in the feminine symbol it denoteth the two 
females (namely, the supernal mother and the inferior 
mother; the understanding and the kingdom). And it 
is discovered through the forms. (That is, when the 
beard of Macroprosopus, and its forms or parts, send. 


74 KABBALAH. 


down his light into Microprosopus; then herein is his 
bride produced in the light, and the supernal H, He, is 
reflected by another inferior H, He.) 


[See Introduction, wherein a Table is given showing the writing 
of the Tetragrammaton in the four worlds. ] 


39. VV, Vau, is extended by another (Vau, as it is 
written V V,*for likewise it is elsewhere written with I 
in the name OB, Απ, and by A in the names SG, Seg, 
and MH, Mah, in this manner VAV. So also in the 
name BN, Ben, it is thus written, VV. But to be dis- 
closed it is fully written). Like as it is written, Cant. 
vii. 9, “ Going down sweetly to my delight " (where by 
“ sweetly " are understood these two letters VV properly 
extended). 

[The Authorized Version renders it: “And the roof of thy 


‘mouth like the test wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, 
causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.” ] 


40. In that tremendous flashing flame (is he found 
—1.¢.,1n Microprosopus, seeing that in a lesser degree 
he hath in himself unmixed judgments), for the pur- 
pose of enshrouding that gate (that is, in order that he 
may be advanced to the condition of maturity, and may 
then superumbrate his mother, who is symbolized by the 
fifty gates). 

[* He," that is the letter V, Vau, of the Tetragrammaton. I 
have before noticed that the fifty gates of the understanding are 


equivalent to I and H, 10 and 5, multiplied together, which yield 
50- numerical value of the letter N, Nun.) 


41. (He is therefore called) the supernal V, Vaw 
{Daath or knowledge, and) the inferior V, Vau (that 
is, the external Microprosopus. And thus also) the 
supernal H, He (the mother) the inferior H, He (the 
bride). But I, Yod, is above all (symbolizing the father), 
and with him is none other associated; he is I, Yod, 
as at first; neither ascendeth he in himself (through 
the height of the numeration, like as with H, He, the 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 75 


pentad, with Vau, the hexad, ascend to a similar height) 
except as a symbolic glyph. (That is, the decad, which 
is expressed not in that same letter I, Yod, but by a 
hexad and a tetrad.) 


[But Vau, V, is produced by adding the numerical values of 
I and H (the father and the mother of the Tetragrammaton), 
and then taking the least number of the result, thus: I+H= 
104- 5— 15, and by adding the digits of 15 together, 1+5, we obtain 
6—V, Vau. By the phrase “with H, He, the pentad (5), with V, 
Vau, the hexad (6), ascend," is implied the numerical value of 
those letters taken as symbolical sephirotic glyphs. The decad is 
repeated in the word IVD, Yod, by the addition of the last two 
letters, V and D, which =6+4=10, I, Yod, again.] 


42. For when the double forms are manifested 
(namely, the letters of the name in the above proposed 
form, as HH. and VV) and are united in one path, in 
one combination, in order that they may be explained 
(that is, when they are fully written out in the.above 
manner), then VD, Vau, Daleth (and not another I, Yod), 
are added unto I, Yod (so that also in it there may be a 
certain hidden analogy of the equilibrium). 

43. Woe! woe! when this is taken away, and when 
the other two alone are manifested (that is, when from 
those two letters VD, in the word IVD, the letter I is 
taken away; seeing it representeth the abstraction of 
the father from the Microprosopus and his bride, who 
are as yet hidden in the mother, so that the disclosure 
of these two is vain and abortive, because the generative 
power of the father is absent * *) * * *, (Or, in 
another sense, if the influx be hindered and the supernal 
paths suffer disruption). Far, far from us be that 
effect ! | 

44. (But that this may be done by the sins of the 
inferiors is clear from those words) Ezek. i. 14: 
* And the living creatures rush forth and return." 
Also Num. xxiv. 11: ‘Flee unto thy place." Also 
Obad. i. 4: ‘‘ Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, 


76 KABBALAH. 


and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence 
will I cast thee down.” 

45. (Again it is said) Gen. 1. 12: “ And the earth 
brought forth germjnation.”. When? When the name 
is planted therein (that is, when  Microprosopus re- 
ceiveth his proper conformation, according to the re- 
quisite numbers—248 of the members, and 365 of the 
veins.) 


[These numbers, 248 and 365, are formed by an elaborate com- 
bination of Gematria, too complicated to enter upon here.] 


46. And then the wind bloweth (that is, the vital in- 
flux rusheth forth from Macroprosopus) and the spark of 
flame is prepared (that is, Microprosopus, who, great as he 
is, yet is in respect of the superiors only as a spark com- 
pared with fire, as he is produced from that terrific 
light.) 

47. And amid the insupportable brilliance of that 
mighty light, as it were, the likeness of a head ap- 
peareth. (That is, the highest crown is found in Macro- 
prosopus. ) 

48. And above him is the plenteous dew, diverse with 
twofold colour. (Like as in Macroprosopus it is white 
alone, so here it is white and red, on account of the 
judgments. See “ Idra Rabba,” § 44.) 


[Above Microprosopus, not Macroprosopus. | 


49. Three hollow places are manifested, wherein the 
letters are expressed. (These are to be understood as 
symbolizing his threefold brain, of wisdom, understanding, 
and knowledge, which here appear more plainly ; whereas 
in the supernals they are more concealed.) 

[^ The letters,” that is, ΤΗΥ, the first three letters of the Te- 
tragram maton. | 

50. The black (locks issuing) from the four (sides of 
the head) float down over the curved openings of the ears, 
so that he may not hear. i 


[* So that he may not hear." Remember, this is Microprosopus, 
or Zauir Anpin, not Macroprosopus, or Arikh Anpin.] 


Λι OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 27 


5I. Right and left is here given (in all parts of the 
face and head). 

[* Right and left:" that is, Microprosopus is symbolized by 
a face in full; while in Macroprosopus “all is right"'—i.e., he is 
symbolized by a profile. This and the following sections are con- 
sidered at length in the “ Idra Rabba Qadisha " (“ The Greater Holy 
Assembly," and the “Idra Zuta Qadisha" (“The Lesser Holy 
Assembly”), to which the reader is referred. 

52. One slender higher path existeth. (The parting 
of the hair.) 

53. His forehead, which shineth not, regulating the far 
distant future when it is his will to behold the same. 
(All the qualities, with their antitheses, which are found in 
Macroprosopus, are more fully described in the “ Idra 
Rabba” and “ Idra Zuta,” which see.) 

54. His eyes are of triple colour (that is, red, black, 
and gold) so that terror may go before them; and with 
glittering glory are they glazed. 

55. It is written, Isa. xxxii. 20: ‘Thine eyes shall 
behold Jerusalem at peace, even thy habitation." 

56. Also it is written, Isa. i. 21: “' Righteousness 
-dwelled in it." 

57. The “ peaceful habitation" is the Ancient One, 
who is hidden and concealed. Wherefore “ thine eyes” 
is written OINK, Awinak (without the letter Yod. All 
these things are explained in the “ Idra Rabba.") 

58. There is also the nose, to dignify the face of 
Microprosopus. 

59. Through its nostrils three flames rush forth. 

60. The profound path existeth in his ears for hearing 
both the good and the evil. 

61. It is written, Isa. xlii. 8: “I am the Tetra- 
grammaton, that is my name, and my glory I give not to 
another.” (Now the author of the “ Siphra Dtzenioutha " 
beginneth to explain the ulterior difference between 
Microprosopus and Macroprosopus, even as to their 
appellations ; where the word ANI, Anz, “I,” in the above 


78 KABBALAH. 


passage referreth to the Microprosopus, since it involveth 
the idea of the bride.) Also it is written, Deut. xxxii. 
39: “Islay, and I make alive.” Also it is written, 
Isa. xlvi. 4: “I will bear, and I will deliver you.” 

[In the word ANI, Ani, the idea of the bride (Malkuth, the H 
final of the 'Tetragrammaton) is implied by the letter I, Yod, being 
last, where it symbolizes the ninth Sephira, Yesod, which is the 
connecting link between Microprosopus and the queen. Also N 
the second letter, symbolizes the conjunction of the father and the 
mother, I and H, as I have before observed. ] 

62. (Now, indeed, Macroprosopus is not so closely 
known by usas to address us in the first person ; but he 
is called in the third person, HVA, Hoa, he.) Like as it 
is said, Ps. ο. 3: ‘‘ He hath made us, and not we our- 
selves." And again in Job xxiii.13: “ And Zeexisteth in 
the unity, and who can turn Him aside ?” 

[For Macroprosopus is only the commencement of manifested 
Deity. 

63. (Therefore in the third person, HVA, Hoa, is He 
called who is the Concealed One, and is not found of any. 
He, who cometh not before the eyes of man; He, who 
is nob called by the Name. 

[^ He, who is not called by the Name ; " for, as I have frequently 
before noticed, the first Sephira is not comprehended in the Tetra- 
grammaton.] 

64. (Hitherto hath the disquisition. been concerning 
Microprosopus, to whom also was referred that fulness of 
form of the letter H, He, wherein it is written by the 
duplicated HH. But now another point is taken into 
consideration, namely, concerning the remaining two modes 
of writing that letter, when it 1s written with A, Aleph, 
and with I, Yod ; of which the former is made in the 
name MH, Mah, and the latter in the names OB, Aub, 
and SG, Seg; which two forms are given conjoined in the 
name AHIH, Eheich (translated “I am” in Exodus), There- 
fore are to be considered) HA and HI. (Whilst, therefore, 
it is written HA, this form can be resolved into HVA, 
Hoa, he, that pronoun of the third person concerning 


PAE COOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 79 


which mention hath been made above : because A, Aleph, 
in itself containeth V, Vau ; to which latter letter the 
middle line, in the form of the character of the letter 
Aleph, can be assimilated. And thus, while it is written 
HA, the word HVA can be symbolized; but not vice 
verså. For although) V in itself containeth A (because 
the figure of the letter A may be said to be composed of 
VIV, if its middle line be divided ; so that also, without 
taking the whole character A into consideration, it may be 
read HV : this HV) nevertheless doth not contain in itself 
any real form of writing H, so that it can be read HV or HI. 

[The reader must remember that the argument in this section 
is concerning the shape of the Hebrew letters mentioned, alone, and 
that neither their numerical value nor articulate power is taken 


into consideration. The shape of the Hebrew letters can be seen in 
the Table of the Alphabet.] 


65. (Moreover, in that same form of writing HA, like 
as A passeth into V, so that HVA, Hoa, may be read: 
so also) A is pronounced Aleph (and this is the second 
way of pronouncing the writing HA, which simply is 
referred unto MH, Mah. But, moreover, also) Aleph is 
pronounced as IVD, Yod (because the form of the letter 
A is usually resolved into these three letters, so that Yod 
may be above, Vau in the middle, and Daleth below. 
So that same written form HA in itself comprehendeth 
also that sublimer triune idea. But not vice versá, from 
HI is HA to be understood, for I, Yod, is not pro- 
nounced Aleph ; but IV D is pronounced as I, Yod, which 
is concealed with all concealments, and to which VD are 
not joined (like as that form is to be found in the shape 
of the letter Aleph.) 


[H, He,in Hebrew is the definite article; so that H-A. may be 
read He-Aleph, the Aleph. 


66. (But this form, which in itself includeth V, Vauw, 
and D, Daleth, is usual in the inferior paths, and also in 


the father. And) Woe! when I, Yod, irradiateth not 
the letters V, Vau, and D, Daleth; (and much more) 


80 KABBALAH. 


when I, Yod, is taken away from V, Vau, D, Daleth, 
through the sins of the world; (because then) the naked- 
ness of them all is discovered. 

67. Therefore is it written, Lev. xviii. 7: “The 
nakedness of thy father thou shalt not uncover.” (For 
VD, Vau Daleth are the same as H, He; and when it is 
written IVD, it is the same as if it were called IH 
(namely if V, Vau, be inserted in D, Daleth). Woe! 
when Yod is taken away from He (that is, wisdom from 
understanding, which is the conceiving mother) because it 
is written, Lev. xvii. 7: “And the nakedness of thy 
mother thou shalt not uncover; she is thy mother, thou 
shalt not uncover her nakedness.” Revere her; she is 
thy mother ; because it is written, Prov. ii. 3: ** Because 
thou shalt call understanding thy mother.” (This is 
arrived at by reading the word AM in this passage with 
the pointing Tsere, instead of with the usual Chireg 
pointing.) 

[^VD-H." This is again referring to the shape of the letter 
in question. | 


[I have already stated in the Introduction, for the benefit of those 
of my readers who are not Hebrew or Chaldee scholars, that the 
Hebrew alphabet is chiefly consonantal, the vowels being supplied 
by small points or marks placed close to the letters.] 


OOE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. δι 


CHAPTER III. 


I. NINE are said to be the conformations of the beard 
(of Microprosopus). For that which remaineth con- 
cealed (that is, the other four forms, which meanwhile 
are not found in Microprosopus), and which is not mani- 
fested, is supernal and venerable (that is, properly and 
of itself doth not refer to Microprosopus, but neverthe- 
less descendeth upon him in another manner). 

[It must be remembered that the beard of Macroprosopus had 
thirteen divisions, therefore the other four forms are the difference 


between the nine of Microprosopus and the thirteen of Macro- 
prosopus. | 


2. Thus, therefore, is this most excellent beard 
arranged. The hairs overhang the hairs from before 
the opening of the ears, even unto the beginning of the 
mouth. (This is the first conformation.) 

3. From the one beginning even unto the other 
beginning (of the mouth. ‘This is the second conforma- 
tion—namely, the beard on the upper lip). 

4. Beneath the two nostrils existeth a path filled 
with hairs, so that it aypedneth not. (This is the third 
οθημονωθέίου. ) 

5. The cheeks extend on one side and on the other. 
(This is the fourth conformation.) 

6. In them appear apples red as roses. (This is the 
fifth conformation.) 

7. In one tress hang down those hairs strong and 
black, even unto the breast. (This is the sixth con- 
formation.) 

8. Red are the lips as roses, and bare. (This is the 
seventh conformation.) 

9. Short hairs descend through the place of the throat 
and cover the position of the neck. (This is the eighth 
conformation.) 

G 


$2 KABBALAH. 


IO. Long and short descend alike. (This is the 
ninth conformation.) 

II. Whosoever is found among them, is found strong 
and robust. (That is, he who directeth his meditations 
herein.) 

I2. It 15 written, Ps. cxmu. 4: “I ealed npon 
Yah, IH, in distress." (In this place) David commemo- 
rateth (these) nine (conformations) even unto (those 
words) “all nations compassed me about,” in order that 
they (the nine above mentioned) might surround and 
protect him. 

I3. (Tt is written, Gen. i. 12): “And the earth 
brought forth germination, the herb yielding seed after its 
kind; and the tree bearing fruit, whose seed is therein, 
according to its kind." 

I4. Those nine (paths of Microprosopus) are evolved 
from the perfect name (that is, from the understanding 
or mother, in whom they were conceived; for unto her 
pertaineth the name IHVH, which is Tetragrammaton 
expressed and Elohim hidden, which form the nine in 
power) And thence are they planted into the perfect 
name, like as it is written, Gen. ii. 8: “And IHVH 
ALHIM planted " (that is, these nine letters of the per- 
fect masculine and feminine name, so that they may be 
a garden—that is, Microprosopus in action). 

[By the expression “ Tetragrammaton expressed and Elohim 
hidden," is meant that the former is written with the vowel points 


of the latter. They “form nine in power," because the four letters 
IHVH together with the five letters ALHIM make nine. 


I5. The conformations of the beard (of Micropro- 
‘sopus) are found to be thirteen when that which is 
superior becometh inferior. (That is, whensoever the 
beard of Macroprosopus sendeth down its light. But in 
the inferior (that is, Microprosopus taken by himself), 
they are beheld in nine (parts of that form). 

16. The twenty-two letters are figured forth in their 


ee BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 83 


9 


colour; not only when the law is given forth in black 
fire upon white fire, but also in ordinary writings, 
because this beard is black.) 

[The number of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet is twenty- 


two. “ Black fire” and “ white fire” are the colours of the beards 
of Microprosopus and of Macroprosopus respectively. | 


I7. Concerning this (beard, that is understood which 
is said) concerning him who in his sleep beholdeth the 
beard. ** When any one dreameth that he taketh the 
upper beard of a man in his hand, he hath peace with 
his Lord, and his enemies are subject unto him." 


[By the “upper beard " is meant the moustache. ] 


I8. Much more (if he seeketh to touch) the supernal 
beard. For the inferior light, taking its rise from the 
supernal hght which existeth within the benignity (thus 
the beard of Macroprosopus is entitled), is called in 
Microprosopus the benignity in a more simple manner; 
but when it hath its action within the light, and it 
shineth; then is it called abounding in benignity. 
(Others read this passage thus :—He who dreameth that 
he toucheth the moustache of a man with his hand, he 
may be sure that he hath peace with his Lord, and that 
his enemies are subject unto him. If that happeneth 
because he beholdeth in sleep such a thing as this only, 
much more shall it occur if he be found sufficiently worthy 
to behold what the supernal beard may be. For this, 
seeing that it is the superior, and is called the benignity, 
irradiateth the inferior. But in Microprosopus, &c.) 

19. It is written, Gen. i. 20: “ Let the waters bring 
forth the reptile of a living soul" (CHIH, Chiah, living 
creature is to be here noted). 

(To this section belongs the annotation which is placed 
at the end of this chapter; which see.) 

20. Like as it is said ΤΗ, Yah (Cn-IH, Ch-iah, the 
corrected Mantuan Codex hath it, so that it may explain 
the word CHIH, Chiah, living creature, out of the eighth 

G 2 


r^ KABBALAH. 


path of the understanding, which is that water of the 
name Yah, which denoteth father and mother. For 
when) the light of the former is extended unto the latter 
(which is the moving of the water) all things reproduce 
their kind at one and the same time—the waters of good 
and the waters of evil. (That is, there is reproduction 
as well in divinity and sanctity as among terrestrial 
living creatures and man; for by the reptile form souls 
are symbolized.) 

21. (For) while it saith: ISHRTzV, Yeshratzu, ** Let 
them bring forth abundantly," they have vital motion; 
and the one form is at once included in the other form; 
the living superior, the living inferior; the living good, 
the living evil. 

22. (So also it is written, Gen. i. 26): η 
Elohim said, Let us make man." (Where) it is not 
written HADM, Ha-Adam, “this man;” but Adam, 
man, simply, in antithesis of the Higher One who hath 
been made in the perfect name. 

[Regarding the “form of the heavenly man,” see Introduc- 


tion, § 55.] 


23. When that one was perfected, this one also was 
perfected ; but perfected as male and female, for the 
perfecting of all things. 

24. (When therefore it is said) IHVH, Yod, He, Vau, 
He (then is expressed), the nature of the male. (When) 
ALHIM, Elohim (is joined therewith, there is expressed), 
the nature of the female (who is called the kingdom). 


[*'The female who is called the kingdom,” i.e, Malkuth, the 
tenth Sephira.] 


25. (Therefore) was the male extended, and formed 
with his members (in order that he might have), as it 
were, regenerative power. 


[The * members of the male" are the six Sephiroth which 
together form Microprosopus.] 


26. By means of this regenerative power those kings, 


ου ο OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 85 


who had been destroyed were herein restored, and obtained 
stability. (For when the lights were sent down through 
narrow channels in less abundance, the inferior intelli- 
gences could take possession of them.) 


[The “kings who had been destroyed,” are the ‘“ Edomite 
kings,” the “worlds of unbalanced force,’ who could not subsist 
because the “form of the heavenly man” was not as yet. See 
Introduction, $3 41, 56.] 


27. The rigours (of judgments, which are symbolized 
by those kings), which are masculine, are vehement in the 
beginning; but in the end they are slackened. In the 
female the contrary rnle obtaineth. 

28. (We have an example of this in this form of the 
name) VIH (where the male hath two letters, and the 
female one only; and the masculine also the letter in the 
beginning long, and afterwards short. But also in this 
form) the channels of connection are shrouded beneath 
His covering (that is, the supernal letters are doubtless 
connected in marital conjunction, but they are enshrouded 
in the letter Vau. And) Yod (is in this place) small, (a 
symbol of the foundation; because) in the very form (of 
the female, that is, even as he is hidden within H, He, 
which also is not the supernal but the inferior H, He) he 
is found. (And all are judgments, because the supernal 
influx is wanting.) 

29. But if (these) judgments are to be mitigated, 
necessarily the Ancient One is required (that is, the first 
letters of the Tetragrammaton, denoting, IH Yah, the 
father together with the crown, which is the apex of the 
primal letter, and is called Macroprosopus.) 

30. The same species of rigours and judgments oc- 
curred in the inferiors. For like as to the He of the 
bride, are added the two letters Yod and Vau, under the 
idea of the leviathan; so) the serpent came upon the 
woman, and formed in her a nucleus of impurity, in 
order that he might make the habitation evil. 


86 KABBALAH. 


31. Like as it is written, Gen. iv. 1: “ And she con- 
ceived and brought forth ATH QIN, Ath Qain, Cain, 
(that is) the nucleus QINA, Qaina, of the abode of evil 
spirits, and turbulence, and evil occurrences.” (See further 
in the “ Treatise of the Revolutions of the Soul.”) 

[The “ Treatise of the Revolutions of the Soul” is not published 
in this volume. | 

32. (But this name VIH) is restored (if it be written 
IHV ; and thus) in that man (the supernal, concerning 
whom it hath been spoken above; and also) in those two 
(namely, the father and the mother, also in the androgy- 
nous Microprosopus: and also partly) in genus (seeing 
that Vaw alone symbolizeth both the Microprosopus and 
his bride) and in species (seeing that Yod and He are 
placed separately as father and mother). 

33. (But just as much) are they contained in the 
special (representation of those spouses, as) also in the 
general (that is, as much in father and mother as in 
Microprosopus with his bride); legs and arms right and 
left (that is, the remaining numerations, collected together 
in two lateral lines, with the middle line representing Vau 
and Yod.) : 

34. (But) this (that is, the supreme equality) is 
divided in its sides, because Yod and He are placed 
expressly as the father and the mother; but in another 
equality) the male is conformed with the female (like an 
androgyn, because the last He is not added. Whence are 
made) IHV. 

35. I, Yod, is male (namely, the father); H, He, is 
female (namely, the mother); V, Vau (however, is 
androgynous, like as) it is written, Gen. v. 2: “ Male and 
female created He them, and blessed them, and called 
their name Adam." 

36. (Thus also) the form and person of a man was 
seated upon the throne; and it is written, Ezek. i. 26: 
* And upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as 
the appearance of a man above it.” 


ME OOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 87 


[This piece alludes to the Tetragrammaton itself, showing the 
hieroglyphic form of a man: the I=head, H — arms, V —body, and 
H-legs. See Introduction and Table of Alphabet.] 


ANNOTATION. 


(Belonging to $ 19, foregoing.) 


I. Another explanation. “Let waters bring forth 
abundantly.” In this place, in the Chaldee paraphrase, 
it is said IRCHSHVN, which hath a general meaning of 
movement. As if it should be said: “ When his lips, 
by moving themselves and murmuring, produced the 
words, like a prayer from a righteous heart and pure 
mind, the water produced the living soul" (The meaning 
is concerning the act of generating life.) 

2. And when a man wisheth to utter his prayers 
rightly before his Lord, and his lips move themselves in 
this manner, (his invocations) rising upward from him, 
for the purpose of magnifying the majesty of his Lord 
unto the place of abundance of the water where the 
depth of that fountain riseth and floweth forth (that 
is, understanding emanating from wisdom); then (that 
fountain floweth forth plentifully, and) spreadeth abroad 
so as to send down the influx from the Highest, down- 
wards from that place of abundance of water, into the 
paths singly and conjointly, even unto the last path; in 
order that her bountiful grace may be derived into all 
from the highest downwards. 

LH, He, the supernal mother. | 


3. Then indeed is such a man held to intertwine the 
connecting links of (them) all, namely, those connecting 
links of true and righteous meditation; and all his 
petitions shall come to pass, whether his petition be 
made in a place of worship, whether in private prayer. 


[Such a man Ἴ---θ., a righteous man, wher praying sincerely. 
“ Links of them ”—i.e., the paths. | 


88 KABBALAH. 


4. But the petition which a man wisheth to make unto 
his Lord can ordinarily be propounded in nine ways. 

5. Either (1) by the alphabet, or (2) by commemorat- 
ing the attributes of the most holy and blessed God, 
merciful and gracious, &c. (according to the passage in 
Exodus xxxiv. 6, &c.); or (3) by the venerable names of 
the most holy and blessed God; such are these: AHIH, 
Eheieh (in respect of the Crown), and IH, Yah (in respect 
of the Wisdom); IHV, od He Vau (in respect of the 
Understanding); AL, Æl (in respect of the Majesty); 
ALHIM, Elohim (in respect of the Severity); IHVH, 
Yod He Vau He (in respect of the Beauty); ΤΖΒΑΥΤΗ 
Tzabaoth (in respect of the Victory and the Glory); 
SHDI, Shaddat (in respect of the Foundation); and 
A DNI, Adonai (in respect of the Kingdom). Or (4) by 
the ten Sephiroth or numerations, which are: MLKVTk, 
Malkuth, the Kingdom; ISVD, Yesod, the Foundation ; 
HVD, Hod, the Glory; NTzCH, Aetzach, the Victory ; 
THPARTH, Tiphereth, the Beauty ; GBVRH, Geburah, the 
Severity; CHSD, Chesed, the Benignity ; BINH, Binah, 
the Understanding ; CHKMH, Chokhmah, the Wisdom ; 
and KTHR, Kether, the Crown. Or (5) by the commemo- 
ration of just men, such as are patriarchs, prophets, and 
kings. Or (6) by those canticles and psalms wherein is 
the true Qabalah. And (7), above all these, if any one 
shonld know how to declare the conformations of his 
Lord, according as it is honourable to do, Or (8) if he 
may know how to ascend from that which is below 
to that which is above. Or (9) those who know also how 
to derive the influx from the highest downward. And in 
all these nine ways there is need of very great concentra- 
tion of attention; because if he doeth not that, it is 
written concerning him, 1 Sam. ii. 30: “ And they that 
despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.” 

[ (1) By the alphabet ”—7.e., according to the mystic qabalistico. 


theosophic values of the letters. (2) Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7: “ And 
the Lorp passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lorp, the 


: OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 89 


Lorp God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in 
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity 
and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the 
guilty ; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and 
upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth gene- 
ration.” (3) By the Divine Names associated with the Sephiroth. 
(4) The ten Sephiroth. (5) Those analogous to his desire. (6) 
Phrases bearing on the subject. (7) The qabalistical development 
of Deity. (8) By the paths. (9) The converse of (8).] 


6. Hereto also pertaineth the meditation of the word 
Amen, AMN! which in itself containeth the two names, 
IHVH, ADNI, Yod He Vau He Adonai (the numeration 
of the former alone, and of these two together yielding 
the same, 91); of which the one concealeth its goodness 
and benediction in that treasury which is called HIKL, 
Ha-yekal, the palace. (Which word by equality of nume- 
ration is the same as ADNI, A4dona?; but this name 
is said to be the palace of Tetragrammaton, because, in 
the first place it is pronounced by its aid; also, in the 
second place, it is mingled with it alternately, letter 
by letter, in this way—IAHDVNHI. 

[A+M+N=1+40+50=91. I1+H+V+H+A+D 
+N+I=10+5+6+5+1+4+ 50+10=91. Again: H+1+ 
K+L=5+ 10+ 20+ 30=65. A+D4+N+4+I10=1+4+50+ 
10=65. The Jews, when they come to the word IH VH in reading 


the Scriptures, either do not pronounce it at all and make a slight 
pause, or else substitute for it the word Adonai, ADNI.] 


7. And this is pointed out in that saying, Hab. ii. 20: 
"But the Lord is in His holy temple; let all the 
earth keep silence before Him." (HIKL, Ha-yekal, “ the 
temple, or palace ;" HS, Hes, “ keep silence ;” and ADNI, 
Adonai, * Lord ; " all have the same numeration—namely, 
65.) 

[H + S= 5 + 60 = §5.] 

8. For which reason our wise men of pious memory 


have said mystically, that every good thing of a man is 
in his house; according to that which is written, Num. 


99 KABBALAH. 


xii. 7: “ He is faithful in all Mine house.” Which is 
the same as if it were said *in all which is with Me." 

ο. But if any man attentively meditateth on the nine 
divisions of these forms (see § 5, ante), like as it is meet 
to do; that man is one who honoureth the Name of his 
Lord, even the Holy Name. And hereunto belongeth 
that which is written, 1 Sam. ii. 30: “Since those who 
honour Me will I honour; and they that despise Me 
shall be lightly esteemed.” I will honour him in this 
world, that I may preserve him, and provide him with 
all things of which he hath need, in order that all 
nations of the earth may see that the Name of the Lord 
is called upon by him; and that they may fear him. 
And in the world to come he shall be found worthy to 
stand in the tabernacle of the righteous. 

10. Wherefore such an one seeketh nothing of which 
he hath need, because he is kept under the special pro- 
vidence of his Lord, and can meditate concerning Him, 
as it 15 right to do. 

II. But what is to be understood by that passage— 
* And they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed ?” 
Such an one is that man who can neither institute the 
union of the Holy Name, nor bind together the links of 
truth, nor derive the supernals into the pesition required, 
nor honour the Name of his Lord. Better were it for 
that man had he never been created, and much more for 
that man who doth not attentively meditate when he saith 
Amen! 

I2. For which reason, concerning that man especially 
who moveth his lips (in prayer), with a pure heart 
(meditating) on those purifying waters, in that passage 
expressly and clearly written, Gen. i. 26: “ And the 
Elohim said, Let us make man.” As if it were said 
concerning such a man who knew how to unite image 
and likeness, as it is right: “And they shall have 
dominion over the fish of the sea," &c. 

Hereunto is the annotation. 


Ween OOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 9I 


CHAPTER IV. 


I. THE Ancient One is hidden and concealed; the 
Microprosopus is manifested, and is not manifested. 


[The “ Ancient One" is Kether, Eheieh, Macroprosopus, the 
Vast Countenance. See Introduction, $$, 42, 77.] 


2. When he is manifested, he is symbolized by the 
letters (in the ordinary form in which the Tetragramma- 
ton is written). 

3. When he is concealed, he is hidden by the letters 
which are not disposed according (to the proper order) 
of the letters, or (according to another reading of this 
passage) in their proper place; because also in him 
their superiors and inferiors ere not rightly disposed 
(because of the disturbed transpositions). 

4. In Gen, i. 24 it is written: “The earth brought 
forth the living creature after its kind, cattle and reptile,” 
&c. Hereunto belongeth that which is written, Ps. xxxv. 7: 
* O Lord, thou shalt preserve both man and beast.” 

5. The one is contained under the general meaning 
of the other, and also the beast under the general idea 
of the man (on account of the mystery of the revolution 
of the soul). 

6. (And hereunto pertaineth that passage) Levit.1. 2: 
* When a man shall bring from among you an offering 
unto the Lord, &c. Ye shall offer, &c." Because 
animals are included under the generic term man. 

7. When the inferior man descendeth (into this world), 
like unto the supernal form (in himself), there are found 
two spirits. (So that) man is formed from two sides— 
from the right and from the left. 

8. With respect unto the right side he had NSHMTHA 
QDISHA, Neschamotha Qadisha, the holy intelligences ; 


92 KABBALA H. 


with respect unto the left side, NPSaH CHIH, Nephesh 
Chiah, the animal soul. 


[These answer to the right and left pillars of the Sephiroth. 
See Introduction.] 


9. Man sinned and was expanded on the left side; 
and then they who are formless were expanded also. 
(That is, those spirits of matter, who received dominion 
in the inferior paths of the soul of Adam, whence arose 
base concupiscence.) When (therefore) both were at 
once joined together (namely by base concupiscence, 
together with connexion, and the animal soul) genera- 
tions took place, like as from some animal which 
generateth many lives in one connexion. 

1Ο. (There are given) twenty-two letters hidden and 
twenty-two letters manifested (which are the symbols of 
those sublime forms). 

II. (The one) Yod is concealed ; the other is mani- 
fested. (The one is the understanding or mother, the 
other is the kingdom or queen ; so that at the same time 
it looketh back to the superior paths.) But that which 
is hidden and that which is manifest are balanced in the 
equilibrium of forms. (That is, masculine and feminine; 
the one, the father and the mother ; the other, the founda- 
tion and the queen; meaning principally the female idea, 
which includeth form and receptacle.) 

I2. Out of Yod are produced male and female (if, 
namely, it be fully written as IVD, Yod, they are then 
its augment), Vau and Daleth. In this position Vau is 
male, and Daleth is female. And hence arise DV, the 
two letters which are the duad male and female; and 
not only the duad, but also the co-equal duads (of the 
superior and inferior conjunctions). 

I3. Fod by itself is male (the father); He, female 
(the mother). 

14. H, He, at first was D, Daleth ; but after 1t was 
impregnated by I, Yod (so that thence it might produce 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 93 


the form H—namely the I, Yod, placed at the left hand 
lower part of Daleth) it brought forth V, Vau. (That 
is, the mother impregnated by the father produced Micro- 
prosopus. But in the shape of the letter out of that 
minute I, Yod, which is hidden within the H, Ze, V, 
Vau, is said to be formed. Or from the upper horizontal 
line of the letter H, which is one V, Vau, and from the 
right-hand vertical line, which is another V, Vau, and 
from the inserted I, Yod, is made VIV, the full form of 
letter Vau.) 


[This is again referring to the shape of the letter. See Table of 
the Alphabet for Hebrew form.) 


I5. Whence it is plain that in the letter H, Ze, are 
hidden the letters D, Daleth, V, Vaw; and in IVD, Yod, 
is hidden H: whence are formed IHV. Therefore it 
appeareth that IVD in its own form containeth IHV, 
whensoever it is fully written by IVD, which are male 
and female (namely I, Yod, male, and V, Vau, D, 
Daleth, in the form, H, He, female) ; hence is compounded 
(the son, who is) V, Vau, and who overshadoweth his 
mother. (That is V placed after H, so that IHV may 
form the father, the mother, and Microprosopus.) 

16. (Therefore in the letter IV D, Yod, and in the name 
IHI are hidden two males and two females, which is sym- 
bolized in that saying, Gen. vi. 2: * And the sons of the 
Elohim beheld (the plural in its least form denoteth 
two) the daughters of men " (and this also) This ex- 
plaineth on this account that which is written, Josh. ii. 1 : 
** Two men as spies, saying " (hence is revealed the mystery 
of the two men). But how (is it proved that two females 
are understood) by the words, ** Daughtersof men?"  Be- 
cause it is written, 1 Kings iii. 16: ‘‘ Then came there two 
women unto the king.” 

17. Of these it is written, ibid. 28: “ Because they 
saw that the wisdom of Elohim wasin him.” (Here are 
involved the two males, in the wisdom, the father; in 


94 KABBALAH. 


Solomon, Microprosopus. Therefore) then came they (even 
the two women, the understanding and the queen) and 
not before. 

18. In the palace of the union of the fountains (that 
is, in the world of creation) there were two connexions by 
conjunctions among the supernals; these descended from 
above, and occupied the earth ; but they rejected the good 
part, which in them was the crown of mercy; and were 
crowned with the cluster of grapes. (That is, instead of 
benignity, they were surrounded with judgments and 
rigours. Which also can be explained concerning Micro- 
prosopus and his bride, first in the mother, and afterwards 
in the existences below, and in exile with surrounding 
rigours and severities.) 

[Referring to the previous symbolical explanation of Joshua 
qut. ] 

I9. (Also we find these two equations in that saying) 
Exod. xiv. 15 : “ And the Lord said unto Moses (who is 
referred to the mother) Why criest thou unto Me?" 
(But also a cry is referred to the mother, just as a groan 
is to the beautiful path, and an exclamation to the kingdom. 
But) ALI, ΕΠ, unto me (note this is the same as, “ and 
unto I, Yod ;" ον πο father) '' Speak unto the children of 
Israel (the speech is the queen; Israelis the beautiful 
path) that they set forward.” Wherein note well the 
word VISOV, Vayesaau, “ that they set forward,” wherein 
are VI masculine letters; SO feminine letters). 


[“ But also a cry, &c." Meaning the three Sephiroth, Binah, 
Tiphereth, and Malkuth.] 


20. From above the power of life flowed down in 
equilibrium, for he entreated the influence of the Vener- 
able One. 


[* The Venerable One "—4i.e., the first Sephira, proceeding from 
the AIN SVP AVR, Ain Soph Aur. See Introduction.] 


21. Hereunto also pertaineth that passage, Exod. xv. 26: 
* And if thou shalt do right in His eyes, &nd shalt hearken 


uw DORT OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 95 


unto His precepts, and shalt keep all His statutes." (Where 
in the last word also two equations are placed.) “ Be- 
cause I am the Lord thy God who healeth thee," (Note 
this, because again here is hidden the mystery of the under- 
standing and the wisdom, of the path of beauty and of 
the congregation of Israel.) 


CHAPTER V. 


I {1 written) Isa. 1. 4: “ Woe unto the sinful 
nation, unto the people heavy with iniquity, unto the 
seed of evildoers, &c." (Here the author of the ** Siphra 
Dtzenioutha " reasoneth concerning the small word HVI, 
* woe," which also is a form of the name. And this 
word is alone separated from the following portions of the 
sentence.) 

2. Seven are the paths (if the Tetragrammaton be 
written in this way partially complete), IVD, HH, V, H, 
(where the father and mother are written in full, 
Microprosopus and his bride are written uncovered. If 
here the last and first letters be combined, and the 
penultimate and second, and therefore the paths at either 
extremity, so that they may form the letters) HI and 
VV (mother and son), then are produced (the three 
middle letters) HH, D (which are the symbols of the queen, 
heavy with judgments. But if mother and daughter be 
combined) HVI and HH, (then) is produced jforth VV 
(or Microprosopus) as well as DV (or the androgyn, who 
also is a condition of judgments), for occultly Adam is 
denoted, or the male and female, who are that DV con- 
cerning whom it is written (in the place cited above) 
* corrupt children." 

3. (When it is said) BRASHITR, BRA, Berashith bera, 
“In the beginning created," (the supernal paths are 


96 KABBALAH. 


understood. For) BRASHITH, Berashith, is the speech 
(one of the ten rules of Genesis), but BRA, Bera, is the 
speech halved. (But there are here understood) Father 
and Son, the, hidden and the manifest. (And also) 

4. The superior Eden is hidden and concealed. (That 
is, no mention is made of the crown.) The inferior 
Eden cometh forth so that it may be transferred (towards 
the inferiors) and manifested (through the voice of its 
original, which denoteth wisdom). 


[*No mention made of the crown”—i.e., Kether, the first 
Sephira, Macroprosopus.] 


5. For the name (Tetragrammaton) IHVH, Yod, He, 
Vau, He, includeth the name IH, Yah (which is of the 
father, and the name) ALHIM, Elohim (which here 
followeth in the text, and pertaineth unto the mother). 

6. A'TH, Ath (the fourth word of this text, which in 
another manner signifieth the name) ADNI, Adonai, 
* Lord? (namely, the path of the kingdom; also the 
name) AHIH, JEheieh (that is, the path of the crown, and 
thus symbolizeth in itself the two extreme paths; here 
denoteth) the right and the left (that is, benignity and 
severity), which are united in one (equilibrium). 

[Ath, ATH, means “the,” “the very substance of." Qabalisti- 
cally it signifies * the beginning and the end," and 1s like the term 
* Alpha and Omega " used in the Apocalypse. For as Alpha and 
Omega are respectively the first and last letters of the Greek 
alphabet, so are Aleph and Tau of the Hebrew. The “ two extreme 
paths" are the crown, Kether, and the kingdom, Malkuth, the 
first and tenth Sephiroth, the highest and the lowest, Macro- 
prosopus, and the queen. If the reader turn to the Introduction, 
to the Table showing the Sephiroth arranged in three pillars, he 
will see that Malkuth is, as it were, the antithesis of Kether; and 
hence it is said that * Malkuth is Kether after another manner." 
And this recalls the precept of Hermes in the Smaragdine Tablet , 
“That which is below is like that which is above, and that which 18 
above is like that which is below.” 


7. HSaHMIM, Ha-Shamaim, ‘the heavens" (the fifth 
word of this text, and) VATn, Vaath, ** and the substance 


ο ου OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 97 


of" (the sixth word; they are referred unto the paths of 
beauty and victory) like as it is written, 1 Chron. 29, II: 
* And the beauty and the victory." These paths are 
joined together in one, 


[“ The beauty and the victory" are Tiphereth and Netzach, the 
‘sixth and seventh Sephiroth. ] 


8. HARTZ, Haaretz, “the earth” (the seventh word 
of this beginning denoteth the queen joined together 
with the glory and the foundation), like as it is written, 
Ps. vii. 2: “How magnificent (this is the path of 
glory) is Thy name in all the world” (whereby is 
symbolized the foundation); the earth (which is 
the kingdom. Also) Isa. vi. 3: “The whole earth is 
full of His glory” (where these three paths again 
concur). 

9. * Let there be a firmament in the midst of the 
waters," “to make a distinction between the Holy Place 
and between the Holy of Holies.” (That is, between 
Microprosopus and Macroprosopus.) 

10. The Most Ancient One is expanded into Micropro- 
sopus (or the Crown into the Beauty), and adhereth (unto 
it, so that it may receive increase. If) it be not per- 
fectly expanded (so that Microprosopus as it were existeth 
by himself, but instead is retained in his mother’s womb) 
the mouth speaking great things moveth in that place 
(that Microprosopus, so that he may be fully born), and 
he is crowned with the lesser crowns under the 
five divisions of the waters. (That is, Microprosopus 
receiveth the influx of the five benignities, which are 
called “ crowns,” because they descend from the crown, 
or Macroprosopus; but “lesser crowns," because they 
take their rise from benignity in the Microprosopic path; 
and they are called the five divisions of the waters, 
because the water belongeth unto the benignity, and in 
this verse, Gen. i. 6, 7, the word MIM, Meim, waters, 
filleth the fifth place). 

H 


98 KABBALA H. 


II. Like as it is written, Num. xix. 17: “ And shall 
pour upon him living waters in a vessel" (But the 
life looketh towards the mother; and it) is (understood 
to be that path which is called) ALHIM CHIIM, Elohim 
Chin, “the Elohim of life;" and the king of the 
universe (that is, the understanding. Whereunto belong 
also the following sayings:—) Ps. cxvi. v. 9: “I will 
walk before the Lord in the lands of life.” Also 
I Sam. 29: “ And the soul of my Lord shall be 
bound in the quiver of life.” Also Gen. ui OF 
* And the tree of life in the midst of the garden." 
(All these, I say, refer unto the understanding, from 
which the six members receive the influx. And to it 
also pertain the following names, namely, the name) 
IH, Yah (whensoever it is written in full with A in 
this manner:) IVD HA, Yod Ha (and containeth the 
number of the numeral powers of the letters of the 
Tetragrammaton, namely, 26; unto which also is referred 
that form of the name belonging unto the intelligence), 
AHII, Eheii (where in the place of the final He, Yod is 
put, as in a former instance. (See Chap. I. $ 32.) 


[In the Hebrew, CHIIM, Chiim, “ iving”; in our version of 
the Old Testament it is translated “running water.” Chiim is 
plural.] 


I2. Between the waters and the waters. (Since there 
are the superior) perfect waters, and (those which are in 
Microposopus) imperfect waters (or those mingled with 
severities ; because in another manner it is said) perfect 
compassion, imperfect compassion. (Now followeth a mys- 
tical explanation of Gen. vi. 3.) 

13. And the Tetragrammaton hath said: “ My spirit 
shall not strive with man for ever, seeing that he also is 
in the flesh.” (In this passage, when it is said :) ** And 
the Tetragrammaton hath said,” (it is to be noted that) 
after that there was formed (the supernal structure), in 
the last place concerning Microprosopus (this name is 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 99 


understood). For when it is said, ‘‘ He calleth this also 
by the name,” the Ancient One speaketh occultly in a 
hidden manner. 


[The Ancient One is symbolized by the pronoun He in the sen- 
tence, “ He calleth this also by the name.” ] 


I4. * My spirit shall not strive with man.” (Here is 
understood, not the spirit of Microprosopus, but) that 
which is from the supernals, because from that spirit 
which rusheth forth from the two nostrils of the nose of 
Macroprosopus the influx is sent down unto the inferiors. 

I5. And because it is written (in the same place) 
* And his days shall be à hundred and twenty years," 
I, Yod, is either perfect (whensoever its singular parts 
exist in the form of decads) or imperfect (when they are 
in monads or units). When (therefore) Yod (is placed 
by itself) alone (it is understood to be perfect, because 
in itself it containeth) a hundred. (But if) two letters 
(are put, then are understood the ten units) twice 
reckoned ; (hence are produced) the hundred and twenty 
years. 

[The * singular parts" of Yod are the numbers from one to ten, 
for the number of Yod is ten. But when Yod is taken as its square 
IxI=1ox1o=100. But Il=IxI+I+I (or the two letters 
both multiplied and added together) = 10x Io+10+10=120. But 
when Yod- 100, its digits are tens and not units—namely, the 
numbers 10, 20, 30, &c., instead of 1, 2, 3, &c. 


I6. Yod is alone whensoever he is manifested in 
Microprosopus (that is, when the lights of Macroprosopus 
descend into Him, then indeed the paths of the decads 
are increased, and this decad) is increased into ten 
thousands (by the paths joined with the four letters of 
the Tetragrammaton) of years. (But) hence (if it be con- 
ceived oniy according unto the power of Macroprosopus, 
it hath that position) which is written, Ps. exxxix. 5: 
* And thou shalt place upon me thine hand:" KPKH, 
Khephakha. (Where this word KPKH, if it be written 

H 2 


IOO KABBALAH. 


according to the usual custom KPK, Khephakh, yieldeth 
the number 120. But now by adding the paragogic H 
of the female, there is given the number 125, on account 
of the five severities.) 


[^ This decad is increased into ten thousand by the paths joined 
with the four letters of the Tetragrammaton "—i.e., the paths are 
the Sephiroth=the numbers from one to ten; and they are said 
to be joined with the four letters by multiplying the decad to the 
fourth power, or ro*. Hence for I, the first letter, we have Iox I 
=10; for H, the second letter, we have rox ro— 100; for V, the 
third letter, rox 10x 10— 1,000; and for H, the fourth letter, 
IOX IO X IO X IO— 10,000. 

In the Shemitic languages, a paragogic letter is one which is 
added to a word to give it additional emphasis.] 


I7. “There were giants in the earth," Gen. vi. 4. 
(If this word HIV, Hayu, is considered, which also is a 
form of the often varied name, it taketh its rise from 
the kingdom.)  Thisis that which is written, Gen. ii. ΤΟ: 
* And thence is it divided, and is in four heads." 
(Where is understood the end of that emanation which 
the separated universe followeth. Nevertheless) from 
the place where the body is divided, they are called 
those trees (or, as the Mantuan Codex correcteth the 
passage: Where the garden is divided, and the seven 
inferior emanations are understood; where then it 
divideth the universe into the inferior worlds and pro- 
videth a habitation for the shells or spirits of matter). 
Hence it is written: ‘‘ And from hence is it divided." 


[* The shells ”= elemental spirits. The Qabalah always calls the 
evil elemental spirits of matter “ shells."] 


18. They were in the earth in those days, but not in 
the following time, until Joshua came. (That is, they are 
applicable unto the path of the bride, which also is called 
the land of Canaan, wherein Joshua found the giants. 
For the word NPILIM, JVephilim, occurreth not fully, 
except when it is used in the incident of the spies, 
Num. xiii. 35.) 


Weer OOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. IOI 


I9. And the sons of the Elohim are guarded (nor is 
mention made of a similar case) until Solomon came 
and joined himself with the daughters of men; like as 
it is written, Eccles. ii. 8 : VTHONVGVTa, Ve-Thonogoth, 
** And the delights of the sons of men," &c. Where (in 
the feminine gender) he calleth the word THONVGVTH, 
Thonogoth, and not (as elsewhere in the masculine gender) 
THONVGIM, Thonogim, “ sons of Adam ;" so that it is 
intimated in an occult manner that the latter (the sons 
of the Elohim) are of those other spirits who are not 
contained under the supernal wisdom ; concerning which 
itis written, 1 Kings v. 12: “ And the Lord gave wisdom 
unto Solomon." (Concerning these matters, further see 
the '' Treatise of the Revolutions.”) 


[The “Treatise of the Revolutions” is not published in this 
volume.] 


20. Also it is written, ibid. iv. 31: “ And He was 
wise above every man." Because these are not classed 
with man. 

21. (But when it is said) “ And the Tetragrammaton 
gave him wisdom,” then is understood the supernal Fe. 
(Because he gave unto him the influx of the wisdom of 
the queen. “And he was wise before every man,” 
because from her he received the wisdom here below 
(through the path to the kingdom). 

22. Those (spirits) are powerful who exist from 
eternity. That is, from (eternity or) the supernal world 
(the understanding, namely, whence are excited severity 
and rigour). The men of the name (that is) who exer- 
cised themselves in the name. 

23. In what name? In the Holy Name, wherein 
they exercised themselves (for the performing of various 
wonders) and not the holy inferiors. Yet (these) did 
not exercise themselves save in the name (and not in 
holiness). 

24. It is said openly “the men of the name," and 


102 KABBALAH. 


not “the men of the Tetragrammaton.” Not (therefore 
used they the name) with respect unto the mystery of 
the Arcanum, or in a diminutive form; nor yet with any 
diminution of the (name itself). 

25. (And because) the men of the name (are) openly 
(spoken of, hence) are they shut out from the general 
conception of man. 

26. It is written, Ps. xlix. 12: “Man οπου 
honour, abideth not.” (When it is said) “ man being in 
honour” (the same is as if also it were said, a man such 
as was Solomon) shall not remain long in the honour of 
the King without the spirit, (That is, in the influx from 
the King, Microprosopus, to whom, or to the beautiful 
path, the spirit belongeth.) 

27. Thirteen kings (that is, the twelve metatheses of 
the Tetragrammaton with its radix, which are the measures 
of mercies) wage war with seven (with the Edomite 
kings; because, while the lights of the former flowed 
down, these could not maintain themselves, and, besides, 
they are the classes of the most rigorous judgments 
which are opposed to the mercies. For) seven kings are 
seen in the land (Edom), and now after that their vessels 
are broken, they are called shells, who have fallen down 
among the inferiors. These) nine vanquished in war 
(the measures of Microprosopus, concerning which see 
the “ Idra Rabba”; through which David conquered his 
enemies), which ascend in the paths of those which pass 
downward, on account of His ruling power (that 1s, 
which make thirteen, as they are in Macroprosopus and 
his beard, which is called his influence, and freely 
floweth down), and there is none who can withhold 
their hand. (For whilst the supernal measures permit 
the increase in the inferiors, all judgments are sub- 
dued.) 


[Concerning the “twelve banners of the sacred Name,” the 
metatheses of the Tetragrammaton, see Introduction, § 62; also 
concerning the Edomite kings. I have before remarked that the 


THE BOOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 103 


demons are called Qliphoth, or “ shells,” by the Qabalists. The 
thirteen in Microprosopus is composed of nine manifest and four 
hidden. 


28. Five kings (that is, the five letters MNTZPK, 
Me, Nun, Tzaddi, Pe, Kaph, which are the roots of the 
judgments), betake themselves unto swift flight before 
four (the four letters of the Tetragrammaton which bear 
with them the influx of benignity. They cannot remain 
(since the judgments and rigours cease and flee). 

[The letters of the Hebrew alphabet are divided into three 
classes, the three mothers as they are called, AMSu; the seven 
duplex letters, BGDKPRTu, so called because they are some- 
times tenues and sometimes aspirates, according to whether they 
are written with or without the Daghesh point; and the twelve 
simple letters, HVZCuTILNSOTzQ. They are also divided 
into the three categories of Chesed, Din, and Rachmim, or mercy, 
judgment, and mildness. Now these five letters MNTzPK denote 
the severest judgments, and their number =280=PR=the name 
of the angel Sandalphon, SNDLPVN, the angel IOR, or of the 
wood of the world of Asiah, since the greatest part of it are sterile 
trees. 


29. Four kings slay four (that is, the four letters of 
the Tetragrammaton are bound together with the four 
letters of ADNI, Adonai, which) depend from them like 
grapes in a cluster (in the concatenation of these two 
names, thus, [AHDVNHI). 

30. Among them are set apart (that is, among these 
paths of the Divine names a selection of holiness is 
made from these broken vessels) seven channels (that is, 
seven broken vessels, which now are like the shells, and 
contain in themselves a great part of the lights and 
souls) ; they testify testimony (that is, the souls thus 
selected, thence having been born into the universe, testify 
that they are freed from impurity) and they do not 
remain in their place (and are no longer detained under 
the shells). 

31. The tree which is mitigated (that is, the path of 
the kingdom or Schechinah, which is the tree of the 


104. KABBALAH. 


knowledge of good and evil, which in itself existeth 
from the judgments, but is mitigated by the bridegroom 
through the influx of mercies) resideth within (within the 
shells; because the kingdom hath its dominion over all 
things, and its feet descend into death). In its branches 
(in the inferior worlds) the birds lodge and build their 
nests (the souls and the angels have their place). Beneath 
it those animals which have power seek the shade (that is, 
the shells, * for in it every beast of the forest doth walk 
forth,” Ps. civ. 20). 


[See the Introduction for the Sephiroth arranged in the three 
pillars, or tree of life.] 


32. This is the tree which hath two paths (for thus is 
this passage restored in the corrected Codex) for the same 
end (namely, good and evil, because it is the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil). And it hath around it 
seven columns (that is, the seven palaces), and the four 
splendours (that is, the four animals) whirl around it (in 
four wheels) on their four sides (after the fourfold 
description of the chariot of Yechesqiel (Ezekiel). 


The seven palaces answer to the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 
gth Sephiroth, operating through the respective orders of angels 
into the spheres of the seven planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, 
Venus, Mercury, and Luna. The four animals, or Chaioth Ha- 
Qadesch, are the vivified powers of the four letters of the Tetra- 
grammaton operating under the presidency of the first Sephira as 
the mainspring or primum mobile of creation. The four wheels 
are their correlatives under the second Sephira, on their four 
sides—namely, the four elements of the air, fire, water, and earth, 
which are the abodes of the spirits of the elements, the sylphs, 
salamanders, undines, and gnomes, under the presidency of the 
tenth Sephira. 


33. The serpent (which was made from the rod of 
Moses—that is, the shell—NVGH, Nogah, or splendour) 
which rusheth forth with three hundred and seventy leaps 
(the thirty-two names together with the five letters of 
ALHIM, L£lohim, which make 37, multiplied by the 


MARR OCK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 105 


decad 370, and the judgments of the bride are denoted, 
to which that shell directeth his springs, because he is of 
middle nature betwixt the holy and the profane). “ΗΘ 
leapeth upon the mountains, and rusheth swiftly over 
the hills" like as it is written (Cant. ii. 8. That is, 
he leapeth high above the rest of the shells) He 
holdeth his tail in his mouth between his teeth (that is, 
his extremity, by which he is linked to the shells, turneth 
towards his other extremity wherewith he looketh towards 
holiness). He is pierced through on either side (so that 
he may seek to receive the superior and inferior nature). 
When the chief ariseth (who is Metatron) he is changed 
into three spirits (that is, he assumeth the nature of three 
inferior shells). 

[4 Nogah " is also the qabalistical title of the sphere ofthe planet 
Venus. MTTRVN, Metatron, or Methraton, is the particular in- 
telligence of the first Sephira, and is called the “ Prince of Faces :” 


he is said also to have been the “ruler of Moses.” Methraton has 
the same numeration as SuDI, Shaddai, the Almighty. ] 


34. (But concerning Metatron) it is written, Gen. 
v. 22: “And Enoch walked with the Elohim” (because 
out of Enoch, Metatron is formed). And it is written, 
Prov. xxi. 6: ‘‘Enoch hath been made into a boy, 
according to his path.” (That is, “hath been changed 
into ") the boy (namely, Metatron, who is spoken of under 
his name NOR, Nour, which meaneth a ** boy ”). 

[^ Enoch hath been made into a boy," &c. This peculiar rendering 
of the passage, “Train up a child in the way,” &c., arises from 


reading in the Hebrew text CHNVK, Chanokh, Enoch, instead of 
CENE, Chanekh, “train up,” or * instruct."] 


55. With the Elohim, and not with the Tetragram- 
maton (because he himself is referred unto the path 
of the queen, to whom is attributed this name of Rigour). 
* And he existed not" (longer) under this name (Enoch), 
because the Elohim took him in order that he might be 
called by this name. (For this name is communicable 


1c6 KABBALA ZR. 


unto the angels, and in the first instance unto this chief 
among them, namely, Metatron.) 

36. There are three houses of judgment given, which 
are four (that is, the three letters IHV, referred into the 
„understanding, which yield the four letters of the Te- 
tragrammaton, pointed with the vowel points of the name 
Elohim. For) there are four superior houses of judgment 
(the four said Tetragrammatic letters) and four inferior 
(which are the four letters ADNI, Adonai, belonging unto 
the kingdom). For it is written, Lev. xix. 35: * Ye shall 
not do iniquity in judgment, in dimension, in weight, and 
in measure.” (Where these four are mystically intimated.) 

37. (There is one) rigorous judgment (of severity), 
another that is not rigorous (that is, of the kingdom). 
There is one judgment by balance (wherein are the two 
scales of merit and error), another judgment which is 
not made by balance; (and this is) the gentle judgment 
(whereby the Israelites are judged. But also there is 
given) the judgment which is neither of the one nature 
nor of the other. (Namely, the beautiful path.) 

[Of course the “ beautiful path” is Tiphereth, the sixth Sephira. ] 


38. (Further on it is written), Gen. vi. 1: “And 
it came to pass when man began to multiply upon the 
face of the earth.” (Where by these words) ADM, 
Adam, began to multiply (there is understood Daath, or 
the knowledge, the soul of the beautiful path, to which 
Moses is referred ; which sendeth down many lights into 
the bride, the earth, when the spouse ascendeth thither). 
This is that which is written (ibid. 3): BSHGM, Beshegam, 
“in that also, he is flesh " (which word Beshegam, “ in that 
also," by equality of numeration equalleth MSaH, Moses) 
Adam (namely) the supernal (Daath, or knowledge). And 
it is written: “ Upon the face of the earth” (which face 
of the earth is this, that the highest representation of the 
queen is the understanding, the mother, unto whose gates 
Moses ascended). 


WIEROOK OF CONCEALED MYSTERY. 107 


39. (Concerning this face, it is written) Exod. xxxiv. 
29: “ And Moses knew not that the skin of his face 
shone ” where by the face the mother is understood ; by 
the skin, the queen.) This is that which is said, Gen. 
iil. 21 : “ Tunics of skin " (because by itself the kingdom 
is wanting in light). 

40. To shine (but when it is said “the face of Moses,” 
the mother is understood), according to that passage, 
I Sam. xvi. I3: “And Samuel took the horn of oil" 
(where by the oil, the wisdom, by the horn, or the splen- 
dour of the oil, the understandingis denoted). For there 
is no anointing except by the horn (that is, every descent 
of unction is through the mother) Hence it is said, 
Ps, Ixxxix. 18: “ And in thy favour our horn shall be 
exalted.” (Also) Ps. exxxii 17: “There shall the horn 
of David flourish” (that is, the queen shall receive the 
influx from the mother). This is the tenth of the kings 
(that is, the path of the kingdom), and originateth from 
jubilee, who is the mother. 

41. For it is written, Josh. vi. 5: * And it shall be 
when the horn of jubilee is sounded." This is the splen- 
dour of the jubilee, and the tenth (path) is crownec by 
the mother, 

42. (This is) the horn which receiveth the horn and 
the spirit, that it may restore the spirit of Yod He unto 
Yod He. (That is, when the spirit is to be given unto 
Microprosopus, his mother contributed as much, which is 
QRN, Qaran, “the horn,” the brilliancy, as the increase 
which he receiveth from the father.) And this is the 
horn of jubilee. And IVBL, Yobel, “jubilee,” is H, He 
(the first He of the Tetragrammaton) ; and He is the spirit 
rushing forth over all (because the mother is the world 
to come, when in the resurrection all things will receive 
the spirit); and all things shall return unto their place 
(like as in the jubilee, so in the world to come). 

43. For it is written, AHH, IHVH, ALHIM, Ahah 
Tetragrammaton Elohim ! ** Ah Tetragrammaton Elohim !” 


108 f RABAT. 


When the H, Hc, appeareth (first), and H, He (in the 
second place); then is Tetragrammaton called Elohim 
(like as a judge; because in the world to come there will 
be work for much strength. This is) the full name. 
And it is written, Isa. ii I1: “ And Tetragrammaton 
alone shall be exalted in that day. When the one He is 
turned towards the other He, and Yod is taken away, 
then cometh vengeance into the universe; and except 
for that Adam who is called Tetragrammaton, the universe 
would not exist; but all things would be destroyed. 
Hence it is written: “ And the Tetragrammaton alone,” 
&c. 

44. Hereunto is the hidden and involved Mystery of 
the King, that is “The Book of Concealed Mystery.” 
Blessed is he who entereth into and departeth therefrom, 
and knoweth its paths and ways. 


MARA RBA QDISHA 


(HA IDRA RABBA QADISHA); 


OR, 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 


CHAPTER I. 
THE INGRESS AND THE PREFACE. 


I. TRADITION.—Rabbi Schimeon spake unto his com- 
panions, and said: “ How long shall we abide in the 
condition of one column by itself? when it is written, 
Psa, cxix. 126: ‘It is time for Thee, Lord, to lay to 
Thine hand, for they have destroyed Thy law.’ 

2. “The days are few, and the creditor is urgent; the 
herald crieth aloud daily, and the reapers of the land are 
few; and those who are about the end of the vineyard 
attend not, and have not known where may be the lawful 
place. (That is, do not study holiness, which 15 called the 
vineyard.) 

3. “Assemble yourselves, O my companions, in an 
open space, equipped with armour and spears; be ye ready 
in your preparations, in council, in wisdom, in under- 
standing, in science, in care, with hands and with feet ! 
Appoint as King over you, Him in whose power is life 
and death, sothat the words of truth may be received ; 


IIO KABBALAH. 


things unto which the supernal holy ones attend, and 
rejoice to hear and to know them.” 

4. Rabbi Schimeon sat down and wept; then he said: 
“Woe! if I shall reveal it! Woe! if I shall not reveal 
it!” 

5. His companions who were there were silent. 

6. Rabbi Abba arose and said unto him: ‘ With the 
favour of the Lord, also it is wntten, Psa. xxv. 14: 
‘The Arcanum of the Tetragrammaton is with them that 
fear Him.’ And well do these companions fear that 
Holy and Blessed One; and now they have entered into 
the assembly of the tabernacle of his house, some of 
them have only entered, and some of them have departed 
also.” 

7. Moreover, it is said the companions who were 
with Rabbi Schimeon were numbered, and they were 
found to consist of Rabbi Eleazar, his son; and Rabbi 
Abba, and Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Yosi the son of 
Jacob, and Rabbi Isaac, and Rabbi Chisqiah the son of 
Ray, and Rabbi Chiya, and Rabbi Yosi, and Rabbi 
Yisa. 

8. They gave their hands unto Rabbi Schimeon, and 
raised their fingers on high, and entered into a field 
under the trees and sat down. 

9. Rabbi Schimeon arose and offered up a prayer. He 
sat in the midst of them, and said : ‘‘ Let whosoever will 
place his hand in my bosom.” ‘They placed their hands 
there, and he took them. 

IO. When he began, he said (from Deut. xxvii. 15): 
* Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten 
image, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and 
putteth it in a secret place. And all the people shall 
answer and say Amen !” 

II. Rabbi Schimeon began, and said: “Time for 
Thee, O Tetragrammaton to lay to Thine hand.” Whyis 
it time for the Tetragrammaton to lay to His hand? 
Because they have perverted Thy law. What is this, 


Γι. “6 HOLY ASSEMBLY. III 


*they hath perverted Thy law ?' The higher law, which 
is itself made void, if it be not carried out according to 
his commands. Wherefore is this? (Or, as others read : 
Wherefore is this name Tetragrammaton here employed 3) 
This hath been said concerning the Ancient of 
Days.* 

12. “For it is written, Deut. xxxiii. 29: ‘ Blessed 
art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee?’ Also is it 
written, Exod. xv. 11: ‘Who is like unto thee among 
the gods, O Tetragrammaton ?’” f 

13. Hecalled Rabbi Eleazar, his son, and commanded 
him to sit down before him, and Rabbi Abba on the 
other side, and said: “ We are the type of all things " 
(that is, ‘‘ we represent the three columns of the Sephi- 
roth;”) “thus far are the columns established.” 

14. They kept silence, and they heard a voice; and 
their knees knocked one against the other with fear. 
What was that voice ? The voice of the Higher Assembly, 
which had assembled above. (For out of Paradise came the 
souls of the just thither, that they might hearken, together 
with the Schechinah of the Presence Divine.) 

15. Rabbi Schimeon rejoiced, and said: “Ο Tetra- 
grammaton ! I have heard Thy speech, and was afraid! 
(Hab. iui. 1). He hath said: ‘It is therefore rightly 
done, seeing that fear hath followed; but for us the 
matter rather dependeth upon love.’ Like as itis written, 


* [.e., one of the names of Macroprosopus, the first emanation, the crown, 
Kether. (See Introduction.) 

T In the above verse it is well to note that by Notariqon, the second 
division of the Literal Qabalah, the initial letters of the first quotation give 
the word AIMK, Aimakh, “Thy terror," the addition of the numeration 
of which by Gematria, the first division of the Literal Qabalah, is 71; and 
that in a similar manner from the second quotation, the word MKBI, 
Maccabee, is obtained, whose numeration is 72. Now, 72 is the number of 
the Schemhamphorasch, or “divided name," to which Maccabee is always 
referred. And if to the 71 of the first quotation we add A, expressing thus 
the hidden unity, we obtain 72 again. Furthermore, it is well to note that 
each quotation consists of four words, thus anwering to the letters of the 
Tetragrammaton.—TRans, 


112 KABBALAH. 


Deut. vi. 5: ‘ And thou shalt delight in Tetragrammaton 
thy God.’ Also it is written, Mal. i. 2: ‘I have loved 
you. ” 

16. Rabbi Schimeon said further: “ He who walketh, 
going up and down (from one house unto another) re- 
vealeth the secret; but the faithful in spirit concealeth 
the word’ (Prov. xi. 13). 

* 17. “*He who walketh going up and down. This 
saying meriteth question, because it is said, ‘going up 
and down. Wherefore then‘ walketh?’ The man is 
already said to be going up and down: what is this word 
* walketh ?’ 

18. “For truly it is true concerning that man who is 
not stable in his spirit nor truthful, that the word which 
he hath heard is moved hither and thither, hke a straw 
in the water, until it cometh forth from him, 

I9. * For what reason ? Because his spirit is not a firm 
spirit. 

20. * But concerning him who is firm in spirit it 
is written : * But the faithful in spirit concealeth the 
word. (But this phrase) ‘ faithful in spirit’ denoteth firm- 
ness of spirit ; like as itis said, Isa, xxi. 23 : * And I will 
fasten him as a nail in a sure place. Matter dependeth 
upon Spirit. 

21. “ And it is written, Eccles. v. 6: ‘ Suffer not thy 
mouth to cause thy flesh to sin.’ 

22. * For neither doth the world remain firm, except 
through secresy. And if in worldly affairs there be 
so great need of secresy, how much more in the things 
of the most secret of secrets, and in the meditation of 
the Ancient of Days,* which matters are not even re- 
vealed unto the highest of the angels." 

23. Rabbi Schimeon said, moreover: * I will not say 
it unto the heavens, that they may hear; I will not 
declare it unto the earth, that it may hear; for certainly 
we are (the symbols of) the pillars of the Universe.” 


* Macroprosopus, the first Sephira. 


In eee EK OLY ASSEMBLY. 112 


24. It is said in the Arcanum of Arcana, that when 
Rabbi Schimeon opened his mouth, the whole place was 
shaken, and his companions also were shaken. 


CHAPPER II. 
OF THE CONDITION OF THE WORLD OF VACANCY. 


25. HE manifested the Arcanum, and commencing, said, 
Gen. xxxvi. 29: ‘‘ And those are the kings which reigned 
in the land of Edom before that a king could rule over 
the children of Israel.” 

26. Blessed are ye, O just men! because unto you is 
manifested the Arcanum of the Arcana of the law, which 
hath not been manifested unto the holy superior ones. 

27. Who can follow out this matter? and who is 
worthy to do so? For it is the testimony of the truth of 
truths. Therefore let all our prayers be undertaken 
with devotion, lest it be imputed (to me) as a sin, that I 
am making this matter manifest. 

28. And perchance my companions may speak unto 
me, because some objection may arise against these 
words. For truly this work is not such a one as may be 
easily written down, so that by it may appear how many 
kings there were before the children of Israel came, and 
before there was a king over the children of Israel: how 
therefore doth this matter agree? And for this reason 
my companions have moved the question. 

29. Therefore the Arcanum of Arcana is what men 
can neither know nor comprehend, nor can they apply 
their rules of science to it. 

30. It is said that before the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones, the Concealed One of the Concealed Ones, instituted 
the formations of the King (under certain members and 

I 


114 KABBALAH. 


paths of Microprosopus) and the diadems of the diadems 
(that 4s, the varied coverings whereby the superfluity of the 
Lights is eireumseribed ) ; beginning and end existed not 
(that is, there was neither communication nor reception). 

31. Therefore He carved out (that 4s, hollowed out a 
space by whieh He might flow in) and instituted proportions 
in Himself (in as many ways as the Lights of His Under- 
standing eould be reeeived, whence arose the paths of the 
worlds), and spread out before Him a certain veil (that 15, 
produced a eertain nature, by which His infinite light could 
be modified, whieh was the first Adam); and therein 
carved out and distributed the kings and their forms by 
a certain proportion (that is, all creatures under a eondition 
of proper aetivity ; by which He Himself might be known 
and loved); but they did not subsist. (Here is intimated 
the fall of the creatures, partly into a condition of quiet, 
such as matter ; partly into a state of inordinate motion, 
such as that of the evil spirits). 

32. That is the same thing which is said, Gen. xxxvi. 
29: “ And these are the kings which reigned in the 
land ot Edom, before that there reigned a king over the 
children of Israel" The first king in respect of the 
children of Israel (by the children of Israel are understood 
the paths of the restored world) is the first. 

33. And all those things which were carved out, but 
subsisted not, are called by their names (that is, were 
divided into eertain elasses), neither yet did they subsist, 
until He forsook them (so that they eould receive the lights 
from the receptacles above themselves), and hid Himself 
before them (in diminished light). 


ee GneATER TWOLV ASSEMBLY. IN 


CHAPTER TIT. 


CONCERNING THE ANCIENT ONE, OR MACROPROSOPUS, AND 
CONCERNING HIS PARTS, AND ESPECIALLY CONCERNING 
HIS SKULL. 


34. AND after a certain time was that veil entirely 
disunited in formless separation, and recomposed according 
to its conformation. 

35. And this is the tradition: The Absolute desired 
within Himself to create the essence of light (the law— 
that is, the letters of the alphabet, from whose transpositions 
the law was formed), hidden for two thousand years, and 
produced Her. And She answered thus unto Him: ‘“ He 
who wisheth to dispose and to constitute other things, let 
Him first be disposed according unto a proper con- 
formation.” 

36. This is the tradition described in the * Concealed 
Book of the King,"* that the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, 
the Concealed of the Concealed Ones, hath been constituted 
and prepared as in various members ( for future knowledge). 

37. Like asif it were said, ‘‘ He is found (that is, He 
may in some way to a certain extent be known), and He 
is not found; ” for He cannot be clearly comprehended ; 
but He hath as it were been formed ; neither yet is He to 
be known of any, since He is the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones. 

38. But in His conformation is He known; as also He 
is the Eternal of the Eternal Ones, the Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones, the Concealed of the Concealed Ones; and 
in His symbols is He knowable and unknowable. 

39. White are His garments, and His appearance is the 
likeness of a Face vast and terrible. 


* The “Siphra Dtzenioutha,” cap. i. 8 16. 
I 2 


116 KABBALAH. 


40. Upon the throne of flaming light is He seated, so 
that He may direct its (flashes). 

41. Into forty thousand superior worlds the brightness 
of the skull of His head is extended, and from the light 
of this brightness the just shall receive four hundred 
worlds in the world to come. 

42. This is that which is written, Gen. xxiii. 16: 
“ Four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the 
merchant." 

43. Within His skull exist daily thirteen thousand 
myriads of worlds, which draw their existence from Him, 


and by Him are upheld. 


CHAPTER IV. 


CONCERNING THE DEW, OR MOISTURE OF THE BRAIN, OF 
THE ANCIENT ONE, OR MACROPROSOPUS. 


44. AND from that skull distilleth a dew upon Him 
which is external, and filleth His head daily. 

. 45. And from that dew which floweth down from his 
head, that (namely) which is external, the dead are raised 
up in the world to come. 

46. Concerning which it is written, Cant. v. 2: “ My 
head is filled with dew." 1515 not written: “It is full 
with dew;” but NMLA, JVimla, “ it is filled.” 

' 47. And it is written, Isa. xxvi. 19: ‘The dew of the 
lights is Thy dew." Of the lights—that is, from the 
brightness of the Ancient One. 

48. And by that dew are nourished the holy supernal 
ones. 

49. And this is that manna which is prepared for the 
just in the world to come. 

50. And that dew distilleth upon the ground of the 


PAROA TER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 117 


holy apple trees. This is that which is written, Exod. 
xvi. 14: “ And when the dew was gone up, behold upon 
the face of the desert a small round thing.” 

51. And the appearance of this dew is white, like 
unto the colour of the crystal stone, whose appearance 
hath all colours in itself. This is that which is written, 
Num. xi. 7: “And its varieties as the varieties of 
crystal.” 


CHAPTER V. 
FURTHER CONCERNING THE SKULL OF MACROPROSOFUS. 


62. ΤΗΕ whiteness of this skull shineth in thirteen 
carved out sides: in four sides from one portion; in 
four sides from the part of His countenance; and in four 
sides from another part of the periphery; and in one 
above the skull, as if this last might be called the super- 
nal side.” 

53. And thence is the Vastness of His Countenance 
extended into three hundred and seventy myriads of 
worlds; and hence ARK APIM,f Arikh Aphim, Vastness 
of Countenance is His name. 

54. And He Himself, the Most Ancient of the Most 
Ancient Ones, is called ARIK DANPIN, Arikh Da-Anpin, 
the Vast Countenance, or Macroprosopus; and He Who 
is more external is called ZOIR ANPIN, Zeawir Angin, 


* The hidden sense of this somewhat obscure passage is, that the bright- 
ness arises from the skull, which it conceals, which latter is therefore the 
emblem of the Concealed One. The thirteen parts are three tetragrammatic 
forms, which give twelve letters, and symbolize thus the Trinity of the 
Tetragram ; and the one supernal part isthe unity. The meaning therefore 
is, the Trinity in Unity, proceeding from the Concealed Unity, which also 
proceedeth from the Negatively Existent. Thirteen, moreover, occultly points 
out unity, for ACuD, Achad, Unity, adds up for thirteen. 

+ Or, AVRKA DANPIN, Aurikha Da-Anpin, the Vast Countenance. 


118 KABBALAH. 


or Him Who hath the Lesser Countenance (Microproso- 
pus), in opposition to the Ancient Eternal Holy One, the 
Holy of the Holy Ones. 

55. And when Microprosopus looketh back upon Him, 
all the inferiors are restored in order, and His Countenance 
is extended, and is made more vast at that time, but not 
for all time (then only is it), vast like unto the (counte- 
nance) of the More Ancient One. 

56. And from that skull issueth a certain white shin- 
ing emanation, towards the skull of Microprosopus, for 
the purpose of fashioning His head; and thence towards 
the other inferior skulls, which are innumerable. 

57. And all the skulls reflect this shining whiteness 
towards the Ancient of Days,* when they are numbered 
out of their mingled confusion. And by reason of this 
there existeth herein an opening towards the skull below, 
when they proceed to numeration. 


CHAPTER VI. 


CONCERNING THE MEMBRANE OF THE BRAIN OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


58. IN the hollow of the skull is the aérial mem- 
brane of the supreme hidden Wisdom, which is nowhere 
disclosed ; and it is not found, and it is not opened. 

59. And that membrane enshroudeth the brain of the 
hidden Wisdom, and therefore is that Wisdom covered, 
because it is not opened through that membrane. 

60. And that brain, which is itself the hidden Wisdom, 
is silent and remaineth tranquil in its place, like good 
wine upon its lees. 

61. And this is that which they say :—Hidden 1s the 


* Macroprosopus. 


AE ROEA TEN HOLY ASSEMBLY. 119 


Science of the Ancient One, and His brain is calm and 
concealed. 

62. And that membrane hath an outlet towards Micro- 
prosopus, and on that account is His brain extended, and 
goeth forth by thirty and two paths.* 

63. This is that same thing which is written: “ And 
a river went forth out of Eden” (Gen. ii. 7). But for 
what reason? Because the membrane is (then) opened, 
neither doth it (completely) enshroud the brain. 

64. Nevertheless the membrane is opened from below. 
And this is that which we have said: Among the signa- 
tures of the letters (is) ΤΗΥ, Tau, TH; nevertheless He 
impresseth it as the sign of the Ancient of Days, from 
Whom dependeth the perfection of knowledge, because 
He 1s perfect on every side, and hidden, and tranquil, and 
silent, like as good wine upon its lees. 


CHAPTER VII. 
CONCERNING THE HAIR OF MACROPROSOPUS. 


65. Tus is the tradition. From the skull of His 
head hang down a thousand thousand myriads; seven 
thousand and five hundred curling hairs, white and pure, 
like as wool when itis pure ; which have not been mingled 
confusedly together lest inordinate disorder should be 
shown in His conformation; but all are in order, so that 
no one lock may go beyond another lock, nor one hair 
before another. 

66. And in single curls are four hundred and ten locks 


* Which are the thirty-two paths of the Sepher Yetzirah, or Book of For- 
mation; symbolized by the ten numbers; and twenty-two letters of the 
Hebrew alphabet. 


120 KABBALAH. 


of hair, according unto the number of the word, QDVSu, 
Qadosch, Holy.* 

67. But these hairs, all and singular, radiate into four 
hundred and ten worlds. 

68. But these worlds alone are hidden and concealed, 
and no man knoweth them, save Himself. 

69. And He radiateth in seven hundred and twenty 
directions (others say four hundred and twenty). 

70. And in all the hairs is a fountain, which issueth 
from the hidden brain behind the wall of the skull. 

71. And it shineth and goeth forth through that hair 
unto the hair of Microprosopus, and from it is His brain 
formed ; and thence that brain goeth forth into thirty 
and two paths. 

72. And each curl radiateth and hangeth down ar- 
ranged in beautiful form, and adorned with ornament, 
and they enshroud the skull. 

73. But the curls of the hair are disposed on each side 
of the skull. 

74. Also we have said: Each hair is said to be the 
breaking of the hidden fountains, issuing from the con- 
cealed brain. 

75. Also this 15 the tradition: From the hair of a 
man it is known what he is, whether rigorous or merciful, 
when he passeth over forty years; thus also when he is 
perfect in hair, in beard, and in the eyebrows of his eyes. 

76. The curls of His hair hang down in order, and 
pure like unto (pure) wool, even unto His shoulders. Say 
we unto His shoulders ? Nevertheless, even unto the rise 
of His shoulders, so that His neck may not be seen, be- 
cause of that which is written, Jer. ii. 27 : '' Because they 
have turned away from Me the neck and not the face. 

77. And the hair is less close to the ears, lest 16 
should cover them; because it is written, Ps. cxxx. 2: 
** As Thine ears are open.” 


* For by Gematria Q-- D-- V - 81 = 100+4+6+ 300 = 410. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 123 


78. From hence His hair stretcheth out behind His 
ears. The whole isin equilibrium; one hair doth not go 
beyond another hair, (they are) in perfect disposition, and 
beautiful arrangement, and orderly condition. 

79. It is the delight and joy of the just, who are in 
Microprosopus, to desire to behold and to conform unto 
that conformation which is in the Ancient One, the 
Most Concealed of all. 

So. Thirteen curls of hair exist on the one side and 
on the other of the skull; (they are) about His face, and 
through them commenceth the division of the hair. 

91. There is no left in that Ancient Concealed One, 
but all is right.* 

82. He appeareth, and He appeareth not; He is con- 
cealed, and He is not concealed ; and that is in His con- 
formation much more so than in Himself. 

83. And concerning this the children of Israel wished 
to inquire in their heart, like as it is written, Exod. xvii. 
7: “Ys the Tetragrammaton in the midst of us, or the 
Negatively Existent One?” (Where they distinguished) 
between Microprosopus, who is called Tetragrammaton, 
and between Macroprosopus, who is called AIN, Ain, the 
Negatively Existent ? 

84. But why, then, were they punished? Because 
they did it not in love, but in temptation; like as it is 
written (ibid.): “ Because they tempted the Tetragram- 
maton, saying, Is it the Tetragrammaton in the midst 
of us, or is it the Negatively Existent One ? " 

85. In the parting of the hair proceedeth a certain 
path, which shineth into two hundred and seventy 
worlds, and from that (again) shineth a path wherein 
the just of the world to come shall shine. 

86. That is what is written, Prov. iv. 18: * And the 


* Meaning there is no evil in Him, but all is good. So that, in the sym- 
bolic language of the Zohar, Macroprosopus is represented by a profile 
countenance, wherein one side js not seen, rather than by a fuli face, as in 
Microprosopus. 


122 KABBALAH. 


path of the just shall shine as the light, going forth, and 
shining more and more unto the perfect day.” 

87. And out of that is the path divided into six 
hundred and thirteen paths, which are distributed in 
Microprosopus. 

88. As it is written concerning Him, Ps. xxv. 6: 
“ All the paths of the Tetragrammaton are mercy and 
truth,” &c. 


CHAPTER Wl: 
CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF MACROPROSOPUS. 


89. THE forehead of His skull is the acceptation of 
acceptations, whereunto is opposed the acceptation of 
Microprosopus, like as it is written, Exod. xxviii. 38: 
* And it shall be upon His forehead alway for accepta- 
tion," &c. 

go. And that forehead is called RTZVN, Ratzon, Will- 
power, because it is the ruler of the whole head and of 
the skull, which is covered by four hundred and twenty 
worlds. | 

gt. And when it is uncovered, the prayers of the 
Israelites ascend. 

92. * When is it uncovered?" Rabbi Schimeon 
was silent. He asked again a second time, * When?" 
Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar, his son, 
* When is it uncovered." 

93. He answered unto him: *In the time of the 
offering of the evening prayer on the Sabbath." 

94. He said unto him: “For what reason?” He 
answered unto him: * Because at that time the lower 
judgment threateneth through Microprosopus; but that 
forehead is uncovered which is called * Acceptation,' 
and then wrath is assuaged, and the prayer ascendeth. 


ΠΥ CREAT ER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 123 


DE Wiis is that which is written, Ps. Ixix. 14: 
‘And I have prayed unto Thee, O Tetragrammaton! in 
an acceptable time.’ 

96. * And the time of acceptance by the Ancient 
of Days* is here to be understocd, and of the unveiling 
of the forehead; and because it is thus disposed at the 
offering of the evening prayer on the Sabbath.” 

97. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Eleazar, his 
son, and said: Blessed be thou, O my son! by the 
Ancient of Days; for thou hast found in that time in 
which thou hast need the acceptation of His forehead. 

98. Come and behold! in these inferiors, when the 
forehead is uncovered, there is found fixed shamelessness. 

99. This is the same which is written, Jer. iii. 3: 
« Yet thou hadst the forehead of a shameless woman, 
thou refusedst to be ashamed.” 

100. But when this forehead f is uncovered, inclina- 
tion and acceptation are found in perfect form, and all 
wrath is quieted and subdued before Him. 

101. From that forehead shine forth four hundred 
habitations of judgments, when it is uncovered during 
that period of acceptation, and all things are at peace 
before it. 

102. This is the same which is written, Dan. vii. 10: 
“ The judgment was set"—that is, subsideth in its 
place, and the judgment is not exercised. 

103. And this is the tradition: There is no hair 
found on that part, because it is opened and not 
covered. 

104. It is covered, I say, and the executors of judg- 
ment behold this, and are pacified, and (judgment) is not 
exercised. 

105. This is the tradition: This forehead hath been 
extended into two hundred and seventy thousand lights 
of the luminaries of the superior Eden. 


* Macroprosopus. + That of Macroprosopus, 


124 AABBALA RH. 


106. This is the tradition: There existeth an Eden 
which shineth in Eden. The superior Eden, which is 
not uncovered, and is hidden in concealment, and is not 
distributed into the paths, like as it hath been said. 

107. The inferior Eden is distributed into its paths ; 
(namely) into thirty-two directions of its paths. 

108. And although this Eden is distributed into its 
path, yet is it not known unto any, save unto Micro- 
prosopus. 

109. But no man hath known the superior Eden, 
nor its.paths, except Macroprosopus Himself. 

IIO. Like as it is written, Job xxviii. 23: ‘God 
understandeth the way thereof, and He knoweth the 
place thereof.” 

III. “The Elohim understand the way thereof :” 
this is the inferior Eden, known unto Microprosopus. 
* And He hath known the place thereof:" this is the 
superior Eden, which the Ancient of Days hath known, 
the most abstruse of all. 


CHAPTER SUE. 
CONCERNING THE EYES OF MACROPROSOPUS. 


112. ΤΗΕ eyes of the White Head * are diverse from 
all other eyes. Above the eve is no eyelid, neither is 
there an eyebrow over it. 

113. Wherefore? Because it is written, Ps. exxi. 4: 
* Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber 
nor sleep ; " that is, the superior Israel. 

114. Also itis written, Jer. xxxii. v. 19: “ Whose eyes 
are open." 


* This, like Macroprosopus, is a title of Kether, the first Sephira. (See 
Introduction.) 


Γι ΕΑ HOMY ASSEMBLY. 12 


Wi 


115. And this is the tradition. Seeing that all is 
operated through mercies, He hath not covering unto 
His eye, nor eyebrow above His eye; how little, then, 
doth the White Head require such. 

116. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Abba, and 
said: “Το what is this like?” He answered unto 
him: * To the whales and fishes of the sea, which have 
no coverings for their eyes, nor eyebrows above their 
eyes; who sleep not, and require not a protection for the 
eye. 
117. “ How much less doth the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones require a protection, seeing that He far above His 
creatures watcheth over all things, and all things are 
nourished by Him, and He Himself sleepeth not. 

Dess that which is written, Ps. cxxi. 4: 
‘Behold! He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber 
nor sleep. ‘That is, the superior Israel. 

119. “1515 written, Ps. xxxiii. 18: ‘Behold the eye of 
the Lord is upon them that fear Him ;' and it is written, 
Zech. iv. 10: ‘They are the eyes of the Lord, running to 
and fro throughout the whole earth.' 

120. “There is no contrariety (between. these sayings); 
one is concerning Microprosopus, and the other concern- 
ing Macroprosopus. 

121. '' And further, although there be two eyes, yet 
they are converted into one eye. 

122. “ This is pure in its whiteness, and so white 
that it includeth all whiteness. 

123. “ The first whiteness shineth, and ascendeth and 
descendeth for the purpose of combining with that which 
is connected (with it) in connection. 

124. “This is the tradition: That whiteness darteth 
forth its rays, and igniteth three lights, which are called 
HVD, Hod, Glory, VHDR, Vehedar, and Majesty, 
VCHDVH, Vachedoah, and Joy; and they radiate in 
gladness and in perfection. 

125. “The second whiteness shineth and ascendeth 


126 KABBALAH. 


and descendeth, and darteth forth its rays, and igniteth 
three other lights, which are called NTzCu, Netzach, 
Victory, CHSD, Chesed, and  Benignity, THPARTH, 
Tiphereth, and Beauty; and they radiate in perfection 
and in gladness. 

126. “ The third whiteness radiateth and shineth, 
and descendeth and ascendeth, and goeth forth from the 
part enclosing the brain, and darteth forth its rays 
toward the seventh middle light. 

127. “ And it formeth a path to the inferior brain, 
and formeth a path to the inferior, and all the inferior 
lights are thereby ignited." 

128. Rabbi Schimeon said : Thou hast well spoken, and 
the Ancient of Days will open this eye upon thee in the 
time of thy necessity. 

129. Another tradition runneth thus: Whiteness iu 
whiteness, and whiteness which includeth all other 
whiteness. 

130. The first whiteness shineth and ascendeth and 
descendeth in three lights on the left-hand side, and 
they radiate and are bathed in that whiteness, like as 
when a man batheth his body in good unguents and 
odours, in better than he at first possessed. 

131. The second whiteness descendeth and ascendeth 
and shineth in three lights on the right-hand side, and 
they radiate and are bathed in that whiteness, like as 
when a man batheth in good unguents and odours, in 
better than he at first possessed. 

132. The third whiteness shineth and ascendeth 
and descendeth, and goeth forth the light of the inner 
whiteness of the brain, and darteth forth its rays when 
necessary unto the black hair, and unto the head, and 
unto the brain of the head. 

I33. And it irradiateth the three crowns which 
remain, when it is needful, so that it may be uncovered, 


* Netzach, Chesed, and Tiphereth, are respectively the seventh, fourth, 
and sixth Sephiroth. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 127 


if that be pleasing unto the Most Ancient One hidden 
from all. 

134. And this is the tradition: This eye is never 
closed; and there are two, and they are converted into one. 

135. All is right; there is no left there. He sleepeth 
not and slumbereth not, and He requireth not protection. 
He is not such an one as hath need to defend Himself, 
for He defendeth all things, and He Himself waited upon 
al] things, and in the sight of His eye are all things 
established. 

136. This is the tradition : Were that eye closed even 
for one moment, no thing could subsist. 

137. Therefore is it called the open ογ6, the holy 
eye, the excellent eye, the eye of Providence, the eye 
which sleepeth not neither slumbereth, the eye which is 
the guardian of all things, the eye which is the sub- 
sistence of all things. 

138. And concerning it, is it written, Prov. xxii. 9, 
“The bountiful eye;” thou shalt not read “ the blessed 
eye, but “it blesseth,’ for it is called “the bountiful 
eye," and by it are all things blessed. 

139. And this is the tradition: There is no light 
in the inferior eye, so that it can be bathed in redness 
and blackness; except when it is beheld by that white 
brilliance of the superior eye which is called “the 
bountiful eye.” 

140. And to no man is it known when this superior 
holy eye may shine and may bathe the inferior; and 
when the just and the snpernal blessed ones are about 
to be beheld in that Wisdom. 

141. This is that which is written, δα, lij. 8: “ For 
they shall see eye to eye;” When? “ When the Lord 
shall bring again Zion." Also, it is writtten, Num. xiv. 
14: “That Thou, Tetragrammaton, art seen eye to eye." 

142. And unless the bountiful superior eye were to 
look down upon and bathe the inferior eye, the universe 
could not exist even a single moment, 


128 KABBALAH. 


143. This is the tradition in the ** Book of Concealed 
Mystery ;” Providence ariseth from the inferior eye 
when the highest splendour shineth down upon it, and 
that highest splendour goeth forth into the inferior; for 
from it are all things illuminated. 

144. This is that which is written, Num. xiv. 14: 
“That Thou, O Tetragrammaton! art seen eye to eye." 
Also it is written, Ps. xxxii. 18: “ Behold the eye of 
the Lord is upon them that fear Him.” And it is 
written, Zech. iv. 10: ‘‘ The eyes of the Lord running 
to and fro throughout the whole earth.” 

145. “ The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear 
Him," if they be upright. This is the superior eye. 
On the contrary, when it is said, ‘‘The eyes of the Lord 
ruu to and fro," this is the eye which is below. 

146. This is the tradition: On what account was 
Joseph worthy, so that the evil eye had no dominion over 
him? Because that he was worthy of being beheld by 
the superior benign eye. 

147. This is what is written, Gen. xlix. 22: “ Joseph 
is the son of a fruitful bough; the son of a fruitful 
bough above Ayin.” Why “the son of a fruitful bough 
above Ayin?”* As though to imply, * because of that 
eye which beheld him." 

148. Also it is written, Prov. xxii. 9 : ** The bountiful 
eye shall be blessed. " Why? Because it giveth its bread 
unto the poor. 

149. Why isit said in the singular number? Come 
and see. In the eyes which are inferior are a right eye 
and a left eye, and they are of two diverse colours, 

150. But in this instance there is no left eye, and 
they both ascend in one path, and all are right, And 
on that account is one eye mentioned, and not two. 

151. And this is the tradition: This eye, which is the 
eye of observation, 1s ever open, ever smiling, ever glad. 

152. Such are not the inferiors, who in themselves 


* The word Ayiu means eye.—TnaAsNs. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 129 


have redness, and blackness, and whiteness—three 
colours; and are not always open, for there are eye- 
lids as a protection over these eyes. 

153. And concerning this matter it is written, Ps. 
xliv. 23: * Awake, O Lord: why sleepest Thou?” And, 
2 Kings xix. 16 : “ Open Thine eyes, O Lord." 

I54. When they are opened, for some are they opened 
for good, and on some are they opened for evil. 

I55. Woe unto him upon whom 1t is opened, so that 
the eye is mingled with redness, and unto whom the red- 
ness appeareth, spreading across that eye. Who can 
escape from it? 

156. But the Ancient of Days is blessed, presiding 
over that eye the white brilliance of whiteness, seeing 
that also it is of such whiteness that it endureth all 
whiteness. 

157. Blessed also is his portion whom that brilliance 
of all whiteness irradiateth. 

158. And concerning this certainly it is written, 
Prov. xxii. 9: “ The good eye is to be blessed." — And itis 
written, Isa. ii. 5 : * Be ye present, O house of Jacob, and 
let us walk in the light of Tetragrammaton ! " 

I59. Thisisthetradition : Save in all these instances, 
the name of the Ancient One is concealed from all, and 
is not mentioned in the law, save in one place, where 
Microprosopus sware unto Abraham. 

160. Like as it is written, Gen. xxii. 16: “ By Myself 
have I sworn, saith Tetragrammaton.” (Understand) that 
this is said concerning Microprosopus. 

161. Also it is written, Gen. xlvin. 20: “ In thee shall 
Israel bless.” That is, the superior Israel. 

162. Also it is written, Isa. xlix. 3: **Israel,in whom - 
I will be glorified.” In these passages the Ancient of 
Days is called Israel. 

163. But we have also stated that the Ancient of 
Days is called by His name, yet both this (statement) and 
the other are correct. 

K 


130 KABBALAH. 


164. Thus is the tradition: It is written, Dan. 
vi. 9: * I beheld until the thrones were cast down, and 
the Ancient of Days did sit.” 

165. “The thrones were cast down.” What is this? 
He spake unto Rabbi Yehuda, and said: “ Stand in thy 
place and explain these thrones.” 

166. Rabbi Yehuda answered : “ It is written (ibid.), 
‘His throne is of fiery flame;’ and upon that throne sat 
the Ancient of Days.” 

167. *For what reason? Because thus is the tra- 
dition: If the Ancient of Days were not seated upon 
that throne, the universe could no longer exist before 
that throne. 

168. * When the Ancient of Days sitteth upon that 
throne, it is subject unto Him. For He who sitteth upon 
it ruleth over it. 

169. * But at that time when He departeth from that 
throne, and sitteth upon another throne, the first throne 
is overturned, lest any should rule over it save the Ancient 
One, who alone can sit upon it.” 

170. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Yehuda, and 
sald: “ May thy way be ordained for thee, and may it 
be pointed out (unto thee) by the Ancient of Days!” 


CHAPTER X. 
CONCERNING THE NOSE OF MACROPROSOPUS. 


171. AND come, behold, lo! it is written, Isaiah, xli. 
4: *I, Tetragrammaton, (am) first and with the last. 
I am HE HIMSELF " (Hoa). 

172. All things are HVA, Hoa, He Himself, and He 
Himself is hidden on every side. So also is His nose. 

173. From the nose is the face known. | 


Gee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 131 


174. And come—see ! What is the (difference) between 
the Ancient One and Microprosopus? Over these nostrils 
He ruleth ; one of which is life, and the other is the life 
of life. 

175. This nose is as a mighty gallery, whence His 
Spirit rusheth forth upon Microprosopus, and they call 16 
the Giver. 

176. And it is thus: The Spirit descendeth; and 
again the Spirit from hence proceedeth through those 
nostrils, 

177. Oneis the Spirit ; She goeth forth unto Micropro- 
sopus, so that He may be aroused 1n the Garden of Eden. 

178. And one is She the Spirit of Life, through 
Whom in process of time the sons of David hope to 
know Wisdom. 

179. And from that gallery ariseth the Spirit, and 
proceedeth from the concealed brain, and at length resteth 
upon king Messiach. 

r80. Like as it is written, Isaiah xi. 2: ‘ And 
the Spirit of Tetragrammaton shall rest upon him, the 
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of 
Counsel aud Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the 
Fear of Tetragrammaton." 

181. Apparently four spirits (are described) here. But 
we have already said that the Spirit is one; why, then, 
are three (others added unto it?) Arise, Rabbi Yosi, in 
thy place. 

182. Rabbi Yosi arose and said: “In the days of 
King Messiach, one shall not say unto the other, ‘Teach 
me this Wisdom.’ 

183. * Because it is thus written, Jer. xxxi 34: ‘A 
man shall no more teach his neighbour, &c:, because all 
shall know Me, from the least of them even unto the 
greatest of them.’ 

184. * And in that time shall the Ancient of Days 
arouse His Spirit which proceedeth from His brain, the 
most concealed of all. 

K 2 


το KABBALAH. 


185. * And when that cometh forth all the inferior 
spirits are aroused with Her. 

186: “ And who are they? They are the holy crowns 
of Microprosopus. 

187. “ And there are six other spirits which are 
given. ‘They are those of whom it is written: ‘The 
Spirit of Wisdom and Intelligence, the Spirit of Counsel 
and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of 
the Lord.’ | 

188. “For thus is the tradition: It is written, 
I Kings ii, 12: ‘And Solomon sat upon the throne of 
David. Also it is written, 1 Kings x. 19: ‘The 
throne had six steps.’ 

189. * And King Messiach will be seated on those 
seven (steps) These are those six, and the Spirit of the 
Ancient of Days, Who is above them, is the seventh, 

190. “Like as it is said, ‘There are three spirits 
which comprehend three others. 7 

ΤΟΙ. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “ Thy spirit shall 
rest in the world to come.” 

192. Come—behold! It is written, Ezek. xxxvii. 
ο: “ Thus saith the Lord, ‘Come from the four winds, 
O Spirit!’ But what have the four winds of the world 
to do with this ? 

193. Nevertheless, the four winds are aroused; those 
three, namely, and the Spirit of the Concealed Ancient: 
One; whence there are four. 

194. And thus is the matter; because when that one 
is produced, three others are produced with it, who in 
themselves comprehend three others. 

195. But it is the will of that Holy and Blessed 
One to produce the one Spirit, Who in Herself includeth 
all others. 

196. Because it is written, Ezek. xxxvil. 9: 
“From the four spirits, come, O spirit!” It is not 
written thus: “ Ye four spirits, come!” but ‘‘ From the 
four spirits, come ! 7 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 133 


197. And in the days of King Messiach there shall 
be no need that one should teach another; for that one 
Spirit Who in Herself includeth all spirits, knoweth all 
Wisdom and Understanding, Counsel and Might, (and 
05) the Spirit of Science and of the Fear of the Lord; 
because She is the Spirit comprehending all spirits. 

198. Therefore is it written, ‘‘ From the four spirits ; " 
which are those four comprehended in the seven steps 
of which we have just spoken, $ 189. 

199. And this is the tradition: All things are com- 
prehended in this Spirit of the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones,* Who proceedeth from the concealed brain, into the 
gallery of the nostrils. 

200. And come—see! Wherein is the difference be- 
tween the nose (of Macroprosopus), and the nose (of Micro- 
prosopus). 

201. The nose of the Ancient of Days 1s life in every 
part. Concerning the nose of Microprosopus it is 
written, Ps. xvii. 8: “There went up smoke out of His 
nostrils, and fire out of His mouth devoured," &c. 

202. There goeth up a smoke through His nostrils, 
and out of that smoke is a fire kindled. 

203. When that smoke goeth up, what afterwards 
followeth ? Coalsare kindled by it. Whatis the mean- 
ing of this “by it?” By that smoke, out of that nose, 
out of that fire. 

204. This is the tradition: When Rav Hammenuna 
the elder wished to offer up his prayer, he said, * I pray 
unto the Lord of the nostrils, unto the Lord of the nostrils 
do I pray." 

205. And this is that which is written, Isa. xlvii. 
9: “In My praise (that is, My nose) will I refrain 
My nostrils for thee.” In which place the sentence is 
concerning the Ancient of Days. 

206. This is the tradition. The size of this nose is 


* Ie, The Spirit. 


134 KABBALAH. 


so vast that three hundred and seventy-five worlds are 
supported by it, which all adhere unto Microprosopus. 

207. This is the praise of the conformation of the 
nose. 

208. And this, and all forms of the Ancient of Days, 
are seen, and are not seen ; they are seen by the lords of 
lords—viz., by pious men—and they are not seen by any 
others. 


CHAPFER XI. 
CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS IN GENERAL. 


209. RABBI SCHIMEON began, and said: Woe unto 
him who extendeth his hand unto that most glorious 
supernal beard of the Holy Ancient One, the concealed 
of all. 

210. This is the praise of that beard: the beard 
which is concealed and most precious in all its disposi- 
tions; the beard which neither the superiors nor the 
inferiors have known ;* the beard which is the praise of 
all praise; the beard to which neither man, nor prophet, 
nor saint hath approached so as to behold it. 

211. The beard, whose hairs hang down even unto 
the breast, white as snow; the adornment of adorn- 
ments, the concealment of concealments, the truth of all 
truths. : 

212. It is said in the “Book of Concealed Mys- 
tery ^: That beard, the truth of all (truths), proceedeth 
from the place of the ears, and descendeth around the 
mouth of the Holy One; and descendeth and ascendeth, 
covering (the cheeks which it calleth) the places of copious 
fragrance; (it is) white with ornament: and it descend- 


* Because it is the beard of Macoprosopus, the Concealed Ancient One. 


WOAR HOLY ASSEMBLY. 135 


eth in the equilibrium (of balanced power), and furnisheth 
a covering even unto the midst of the breast. 

213. That is the beard of adornment, true and per- 
fect, from the which flow down thirteen fountains, 
scattering the most precious balm of splendour. 

214. This is disposed in thirteen forms. 

215. In the first disposition are classed the hairs from 
above, and it commenceth from that portion of the hair 
of His head which is above His ears; and descendeth in 
one tress before the apertures of the ears in the most 
perfect equilibrium, even unto the corner of the mouth. 

216. In the second disposition are classed the hairs 
from the corner of the mouth, and they ascend even 
unto the other corner of the mouth in perfectly equated 
order. 

217. The third disposition is from midway between 
the nostrils; beneath those two apertures there goeth 
forth a certain path, and the hair is wanting in that 
path ; but on either side of and bordering that path it is 
fuller and in perfect order. 

218. The hairs which are classed under the fourth 
disposition descend below the mouth from the one corner 
even unto the otlier corner, in perfect order. 

219. The fifth disposition. Beneath the mouth pro- 
ceedeth another path, from the region of the superior 
path, and those two paths are impressed on His mouth 
on this side and on that. 

220. The hairs which are classed in the sixth dis- 
position ascend and come from beneath upwards unto 
the corner of the mouth, and cover the places of copious 
fragrance, even unto the upper corner of the mouth, 
and the hair descendeth at the corner of the opening, 
and across below the mouth. 

221. In the seventh disposition the hair terminateth, 
and there are seen two apples in the places of copious 
fragrance, beautiful and joyful in aspect, because (in 
that aspect) is the universe maintained. And this is 


136 KABBALAH. 


that which is said, Prov. xvi. 15: “In the light of the 
king's countenance is life.” 

222. In the eighth disposition a certain tress of hair 
proceedeth round about the beard, and (the huirs) hang 
down equilibrated even unto the chest. 

223. In the ninth disposition the hairs of the beard 
are interwoven and mingled with those hairs which hang 
in equilibrium ; which hang even thus, so that none is 
pre-eminent over another. 

224. In the tenth disposition the hairs descend be- 
neath the beard, and cover the throat beneath the beard. 

225. The eleventh disposition is, that no hairs are 
pre-eminent over other hairs, and they are restored into 
perfect proportion. 

226. The twelfth disposition is that the hairs do not 
hang over the mouth, and that the mouth 1s uncovered in 
every part, and that the hair surrounding it is beautiful. 

227. The thirteenth disposition is that the hairs 
hang down on this side and on that beneath the beard, 
furnishing a covering in beautiful adornment, even unto 
the chest. 

228. Nothing is seen of the whole countenance and 
of the places of fragrance, except those beautiful white 
apples which produce the life of the universe; and they 
radiate gladness upon Microprosopus. 

229. Through those thirteen dispositions do they flow 
down, and the thirteen fountains of precious oil issue 
forth, and they flow down through ail those inferiors, 
and in that oil do they shine, and with that oil are they 
anointed. 

230. The beard of ornament of the Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones, the most concealed of all things, is con- 
figurated in thirteen dispositions. 

231. From the two beautiful apples * of His counte- 
nance is the face of Macroprosopus illuminated; and 


* The cheeks. 


ΤΙ ασ οὐ ASSEMBLY. 137 


whatsoever is white and rosy is found below ;* it shineth 
and radiateth from that light. 

232. Those thirteen dispositions are found in the 
beard. And in proportion to the purity of his beard,f 
according to its dispositions, is a man said to be true; 
for also whosoever (in sleep) beholdeth his beard, that 
man is very desirous of truth. 

233. We have taught in the ‘ Book of Concealed 
Mystery,’ that certain (dispositions) are found in the 
universe, according to those thirteen (dispositions) which 
depend from that venerable beard, and they are opened 
out into the thirteen gates of mercies. 

234. And he who extendeth his hand in swearing, 
also doth the same if he swear by the thirteen 1 disposi- 
tions of the beard: these are in Arikh Anpin, or 
Macroprosopus. 

235. In Zauir Anpin, or Microprosopus, how many 
are there? He said unto Rabbi Isaac: ‘ Arise in thy 
place, and describe the beard of the Holy King according 
unto the arrangement of its parts. How are these 
arranged ? ” 

236. Rabbi Isaac arose; he commenced and said, 
Micah vi. 18: '' What god is like unto Thee,” &c.; 
“Thou shalt give truth unto Jacob," &c. 

237. * We have learned by tradition that herein are 
thirteen sections seen, and they all proceed from the 
thirteen fountains of excellent oil, of the parts of the 
holy beard of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones. 

238. “ Tradition: A most secret thing is this 
disposition of the beard. Secret is it and hidden; 


* That is, the lower Sephiroth reflect and partake of the properties of the 
superior emanations. 

+ By the beard is of course symbolically meant the atmosphere of good 
or bad deeds with which a man surrounds himself during his life. Con- 
cerning dreaming of the beard, see the “Book of Concealed Mystery,” 
ο, 11. δ 17, 18. 

t Thirteen is by Gematria the number of ACuD, Achad, Unity. For 
A+Cu+D = 14+8+4 = 13. 


138 KABLAGAG. 


hidden, yet not hidden ; concealed, yet not concealed in 
its dispositions ; known, yet unknown. 

239. “The first disposition. We have learned that 
the single locks and the single hairs do not mutually 
adhere unto each other; and that the hairs of the beard 
take their rise from the disposition of the hair (of the 
head). 

240. ‘This matter is worthy of examination. If all 
the hairs of the head and the hairs of the venerable 
supernal beard are balanced in one equilibrium, where- 
fore are some long, and others not so long ? 

241. “ Wherefore are not the hairs of the beard con- 
stant in the same proportion of length ? These also are 
firm; while those which are on the head are not firm, 
but soft. 

242. “Therefore is it said that (in Macroprosopus) all 
the hairs descend equally from the head and beard; for 
the hair of the head is prolonged even unto the shoulders, 
so that it may reach unto the head of Microprosopus, 
from that flux of the one brain unto the other. 

243. * And because they are not firm, also it is 
necessary that they be soft.* 

244. “ We have learned by tradition. What is that 
which is written, Prov. i. 20: * Wisdom (plural in Hebrew, 
CHKMV Tg, not CHKMH) will cry without;' and at the 
end of the verse it is written, ‘She (singular) will utter 
Her voice in the streets. In this text the beginning 
doth neither agree with the end, nor the end with the 
beginning. 

245. ‘Therefore is it said : Wisdom will cry without 
when She passeth from the concealed brain of Macro- 
prosopus unto the brain of Microprosopus, through those 
longer hairs; and thus as it were extrinsically those two 
brains are connected and become in this way one brain. 

246. “ Since there is not subsistence in the inferior 
brain except by the preservation of the supernal brain. 

* Ie. If they be not the one, they must be the other. 


Πιτ το αρ HOLY ASSEMBLY. 139 


247. “ And when this proflux is instituted from the 
one, namely, into the other, this hath place which is 
written, ‘She will utter Her voice;’ namely, in the 
singular number. 

248. * And because She passeth over from brain unto 
brain through those long hairs, these same (hairs) are 
not found to be firm. 

249. * Wherefore ? Because if they were firm, Wis- 
dom could not be conducted by them unto the brain. 

250. * Because Wisdom cometh not from man, who is 
stern and wrathful, like as it is written, Eccles. ix. 17: 
‘The words of wise men are heard in quiet.’ 

251. “ And thence we learn that in him whose hair 
is firm, wisdom dwelleth not.* 

252. “ But because these are long (the others are 
soft) in order that they may bring assistance to all. 

253. * How, untoall? So that it may have entrance 
into the marrow of the spine of the back, which is con- 
nected with the brain. 

254. “ And because the hair of the head doth not hang 
over the hairs of the beard, since the hair of the head 
hangeth down, and is drawn back behind the ears, and 
doth not overhang the beard; because it is not necessary 
to mingle these with those, but all are separated in their 
own paths. 

255. * We have learned by tradition. All the hairs, 
as well of the head as of the beard, are white as snow. 

256. * And we have learned. Those which are in 
the beard are all firm, Wherefore? Because those are 
firm accordingly, that they may firmly mark out their 
thirteen measurements from the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones. T 

257. “And those measurements take their beginning 
from before the ears. 


* Ie., Meaning symbolically, “in him who is hardened.” 
T I have before remarked that this refers tothe unity of the Deity: ACaD, 
Achad, One ; which by Gematria yields 13. 


140 KABBALAH. 


258. “ And those measurements have been included 
within certain limitations, in order that they should not 
be confounded with each other. (Others read the 
passage thus: Because they are communicated unto the 
inferiors. For this have we been taught. The hairs 
commence before the ears, because they have been 
separated, and are not to be mingled with the others,” &c.) 

259. “ But if thou sayest that other (sacred passages) 
are not given, analogous to these (measurements), thou 
art in error, For thus is the tradition: “The thirteen 
measurements of the mercies of the Most Holy Ancient 
One (are symbolized by these clauses of) Mic. vii. 18: 
* What God is like unto Thee?’ the first. 

260. “' Pardoning iniquity ;’ the second. 

261. “' And passeth by the transgression ;’ the third. 

262. “' Of the remnant of His heritage ;' the fourth. 

263. “ ‘He retaineth not His anger for ever;’ the 


264. “ ‘ Because He delighteth in mercy ;' the sixth. 

265. “* Again, He will have compassion on us ;' the 
seventh. 

266. '“' He will subdue our iniquities;' the eighth. 

267. ** And Thou wilt cast all their iniquities into 
the depths of the sea ;" the ninth. 

268. “ ‘Thou wilt give truth unto Jacob ;’ the tenth. 

269. ** Mercy unto Abraham ;’ the eleventh. 

270. * Which Thou hast sworn “unto our abies 
the twelfth. 

271. ** From the days of old ;’ the thirteenth. 

272. “ Unto these correspond in the law, Exod. xxxiv. 
6: ‘God merciful and gracious, &c. And those are the 
Inferiors. 

273. “ And if thou sayest, * Why did not Moses pro- 
nounce those majestic words ?' * It shall be answered unto 
thee: ‘Moses hath no duty to perform save in the 


* Apparently meaning that, as the words of the text denote, it was the 
Lorn and not Moses that proclaimed the titles of Tetragrammaton aloud. 


I X OTOEAMTERJTIOLY ASSEMBLY. 141 


place where judgment is found; and in the place where 
judgment is found it is not necessary to speak thus.* 

274. * And Moses spake not, save in that time when 
the Israelites had sinned and judgment was impending ; 
hence Moses spake only in that place wherein judgment 
is found. 

275. ‘ But in another place the prophet hath insti- 
tuted the order of the praise of the Ancient of Days.* 

276. * And those thirteen forms of the supreme holy 
beard, concealed with many concealments, are most 
powerful to subdue and mitigate all the stern decrees of 
the judgments. 

277. * What man is he who looketh back upon that 
most secret, holy supernal beard, who is not confounded 
before it ? 

278. “ Because also all the hairs are hard and firm in 
their disposition. 

279. “But if thou sayest, ‘What if they be so? 
Surely the lower hairs are black: why are these not as 
those ?’ 

280. * Nevertheless, thus is the tradition: It is 
written, Cant. v. 11: ‘ His locks are bushy and black as 
a raven.’ 

281. “ Also it is written, Dan. vii. 18: ‘The hair of 
His head like pure wool.’ 

282. “There is no contradiction here, for the one is 
said of the supernal beard, but the other of the inferior 
beard.i 

283. “ Also because when the law was given forth 
unto the Israelites, it was written in black fire upon 
white fire. 

284. “ Also the foundation of the matter cometh from 


* Ie., Mentioning the merciful characteristics of the Deity, who is repre- 
sented as the equilibrium of justice and mercy. 

+ That is, of AHIH, as distinct from 1HVH, (See Introduction.) 

t The hair and beard of Macroprosopus, as distinct from that of Micro- 
prosopus. (See the “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. iii. $ 16.) 


142 KABBALAH. 


those hairs ; because they are found (arising) out of the 
(supernal) brain, and stretching down unto the inferior 
brain. 

285. * Also because these are above the beard. Hence 
the beard is distinct, and all its forms are found separated 
(each from the other); so that the beard is alone, and 
its hairs are also distinct. 


CHAPTER XII. 


CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS IN PARTICULAR; 
AND, IN THE FIRST PLACE, CONCERNING ITS FIRST PART. 


286. “THE first disposition is that which commenceth 
almost at the beginning of the hair. 

287. “ Also we have learned: No beard (i.e., no part 
of this beard) is found which doth not (virtually) arise 
from the brain of the head (or from the heart).* 

288. “ But in this (last section) this (first part of the 
beard) is not considered as distinct (from the others). 
For in this chapter only this first form (or portion of the 
beard) is to be considered, which descendeth from the 
beginning of the hair, and it hath this peculiarity 
(namely, that it riseth directly from the brain, which 
cannot altogether be said concerning the other parts of the 
beard). 

289. “ And this is to be kept perfectly distinct from 
this beard—namely, that which exists from the head 
(formed into), one thousand worlds, sealed with a most 
pure seal, with a seal which includeth all seals. 

290. “ The length of that portion of hair descending 
before the ears is not equal to the length (of the beard 


* The heart being considered as the central motor of the body. 


ΓΓΕΗΤΕΝ FIOLY ASSEMBLY. 143 


itself) ; neither doth it twine together, nor hang down 
far. 

291. * But those hairs, when they flow down, are ex- 
tended, and depend. 

292. “And the beginning of the first disposition 
consists of thirty and one equal locks, extended even 
unto the beginning of the mouth. 

293. “ Also three hundred and ninety hairs are found 
in each lock. 

294. '' Those thirty and one equal locks, which exist 
in the first disposition (of the beard) are strong, in order 
that they may dispose the inferiors according to the 
number of AL, El.* 

295. '' What is this AL, El? Mighty and Powerful 
One. 

296. “ And among those single locks are distributed 
one and thirty dominating worlds, so that they may be 
extendedf (correctly) neither on this side nor on that. 

297. * And out of each one of these worlds a partition 
is made into a thousand worlds of desires and of great 
pleasures. 

298. “ And they are all concealed in the commence- 
ment of the beard, which representeth strength ; and they 
are included in that (name) AL. 

299. “ And notwithstanding is AL Himself disposed 
towards mercies, because in Him the Ancient of Days is 
mitigated and included and extended. 

300. * Wherefore even unto the mouth? Because it 
is written, Dan. vil. 9: ‘ The judgment was set, and the 
books were opened.' 

301. “ What is this? ‘And the judgment was set.’ 
It was set in that place, so that it might not have 
dominion. 


* AL, El, God, the Mighty One, is equivalent by Gematria to the number 
31; for A+ L = 1+30 = 31. 

' For were they extended, the number would be altered, and it would con- 
sequently no longer — AL. 


144 KABBALAH. 


302. “This is that which is written, τν. 
* Wonderful, Counsellor, God the Mighty One. That is, 
AL, ΕΙ, such a one who also is mighty, but is rendered 
mild through the holy beard of the Ancient of Days. 

303. “ And an Arcanum is concealed in that place 
wherein it is written, Mic. vii 18: ‘What AL, ΚΙ, 
like unto Thee?’ Because of the Ancient of Days it is 
spoken in the form of the configuration of the holy 
supernal beard. 

304. “The first world, which proceedeth from the 
first disposition, hath dominion over, and descendeth 
and ascendeth in a thousand times a thousand myriads 
of myriads of shield-bearers, and by it are they compre- 
hended under a great seal. 

305. “ The second world, which proceedeth from that 
disposition, hath dominion over and descendeth and 
ascendeth in fifty-seven thousand bodyguards, who are 
the lords of lamentations; and these are connected with 
it for the purpose of disposing the neck of the spine.* 

306. “ The third world, which goeth forth from that 
arrangement, hath dominion over and descendeth and 
ascendeth in sixty-nine thousand authors of grief, who 
are upheld by it, like as metal (is upheld) by the tongs 
(of the smith). 

307. “And by that conformation all those are sub- 
jected, and mitigated in the bitterness of tears, which 
become sweet in the great sea.T 

308. “ Who is he who beholdeth this conformation of 
the holy beard, excellent and venerable, who is not over- 
come with shame thereby ? 

309. “ Who can comprehend the mystery of those 
locks of hair which hang down from Him, the Ancient 
One 2 


* This is of course simply pursuing the symbolism involved in the idea of 
Macroprosopus, being typified by a vast countenance or head. 

+ By the great sea, Binah, the third Sepbira, is probably meant. (See the 
“ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. i .§ 28.) 


ο NCREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 145 


310. * He is set on the crown of crowns, which are 
the crowns of all crowns, and the crowns which are not 
comprehended in the other crowns ; I say, of those crowns 
which are not as the other crowns, for the inferior 
crowns are comprehended by them.* 

311. “ And therefore are those forms (arranged in) 
such conformations, whereunto the inferior forms adhere ; 
and they are the dispositions in which He f is disposed 
Who hath need that He may be blessed by Him,i and 
Who desireth blessing. 

312. '' For whensoever the dispositions take the form 
of these, blessings are found beneath them; and It Is 
that which It Is.$ 

313. “ All things are comprehended in those disposi- 
tons; all things raise themselves up in order that they 
may receive these dispositions of the Mighty King, of the 
Ancient One, the most concealed of all. And all those 
are mitigated by those ordinations of the King, the Ancient 
One. 

314. “ We have learned: Unless the Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones, the Holy of the Holy Ones, were disposed 
in those conformations, neither the superiors nor the 
inferiors would be found, and all things would be as 
though they existed not. 

315. “ Also we have learned by tradition: how far 
do those conformations of the beard radiate splendour ? 
Even unto the thirteen inferiors; and whensoever those 
thirteen are found, those shine. || 


* To comprehend the real meaning of section 310, the reader should have 
carefully studied that part of the Introduction which refers to the Sephiroth, 
which are symbolized by crowns. In this sense the *'crown of crowns " 
is Kether, the first Sephira, the Ancient One; the crowns of all crowns 
will be the first three Sephiroth ; and the inferiors will be the lower Sephiroth, 
and those other forms which are dependent on them, symbolized by the crowns 
of the twenty-four elders in the Apocalypse, which latter is a purely qaba- 
listical work, and is unintelligible without the qabalistical keys. 

+ Microprosopus. t Macroprosopus. § Cf. Exodus iii. 14. 

|| This section refers to the statement that Macroprosopus pours forth His 
splendour upon Microprosopus, so that the latter shines by reflected light. 


L 


146 KABBALAH. 


316. * And all of them are found in the number 
thirteen. 

317. * Therefore is the beard of the King, the Ancient 
One, most venerable among all, at once in its entirety 
concealed and most excellent. 

318. “ And because it is most excellent before all 
things, and concealed, there is no mention made 
concerning ib in any place in the law, and it is not 
manifested. 

319. * But what beard is manifested? The beard of 
the Great High Priest, and from that beard descendeth 
the influx unto the inferior beard of the inferior high 
priest.* 

320. * How is the beard of the high priest disposed ? 
The beard of the high priest is disposed in eight con- 
formations. Because also the high priest hath eight 
vestments, when the ointment descendeth upon his beard. 

321. “This is that which is written, Ps. cassin 2: 
‘Like the precious oil upon the head descending upon the 
beard, the beard of Aaron, which descendeth according to 
the proportion of his attributes, &c. 

322. C And whence is this to us? Because it is written 
in the same place: * Also for brethren to dwell together in 
equality.’ The word ‘also’ increaseth the signification 
of the inferior high priest. 

323. "Seeing that in the same way as the inferior 
high priest ministereth in the high priesthood, so also, 
if it be permitted to say so, doth the High Priest above 
minister in His high priesthood. 

324. “This is the first ordination of the beard of the 
Ancient One, the most concealed of all.” 

325. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “ It is justly 
thy due, Rabbi Isaac, that thou shouldest be under the 
ornament of the conformation of the beard, and that 


* The Great High Priest is the son, Microprosopus, symbotized on earth 
by the high priest. Compare what St. Paul says about Christ being our 
Great High Priest. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 147 


thou shouldest receive the light of the countenance of 
the Ancient of Days, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones. 
Blessed is thy portion, and blessed be my lot with thee 
in the world to come.” 


CHAPTER WII. 


CONCERNING THE SECOND PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


326. “ ARISE, Rabbi Chisqiah, and stand in thy place, 
and declare the worthiness of this part of the holy beard.” 

327. Rabbi Chisqiah arose, and began his speech, and 
said, Cant. vii. 10: “I am my beloved's, and his desire 
is towards me.” 

328. * Who is under consideration here, that ‘I am 
my beloved's ?' and because that ‘his desire is toward 
me?’ 

329. * I have meditated, and lo! I have beheld the 
most excellent light of the supernal lights. 

330. “ It shone forth, and ascended on three hundred 
and twenty-five sides. 

331. “And in that light was a certain obscurity 
washed away, like as when a man batheth in a deep 
river, whose divided waters flow round him on every 
side from that part which is above. 

332. “And that light ascendeth unto the shore of 
the deep superior sea,* for all good openings and dignities 
are disclosed in that opening. 

333. “I asked of them what might be the interpre- 
tation of that which I beheld; and, commencing they 


* Binah, the third Sephira, which is called the ‘ sea” in the “ Book of 
Concealed Mystery." It answers to the first letter H, He, iu the Tetra- 
grammaton. (See Introduction.) 


L 2 


148 KABBALAKH. 


replied, ‘NVSHA OVN, Nosha Auan, Thou hast beheld 
iniquity being taken away." 

334. He said: “ This is the second disposition," and 
sat down. 

335. Rabbi Sehimeon said: Now is the universe 
united together (or mitigated). Blessed be thou, Rabbi 
Chisqiah, of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones! 

336. Rabbi Schimeon said: All the lights are con- 
gregated together which come under this holy seal. 

337. lbear witness that the highest heavens from the 
highest (powers) are above me, and the highest holy 
earth from the supernals, because now I can see what 
man hath not beheld from that time, when Moses for 
the second time ascended the mountain of Sinai. 

338. For I see that my countenance shineth like the 
vehement splendour of the sun, who is about to issue 
forth for the healing of the universe.* 

339. Like as it is written, Mal. iv, 2: “But unto 
you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness 
arise, and healing in his wings." 

340. Furthermore, I know that my countenance 
shineth ; Moses neither knew nor perceived (the fact). 

341. Like as it is written, Exod. xxxiv. 29: “And 
Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone." 

342. Furthermore, I behold before me with mine 
eyes those thirteen sculptured (forms of the beard of 
Macroprosopus), and like flaming light did they shine. 

343. And when the second of those (dispositions) 
was explained by thy mouth, that same at once was 
raised, and conformed, and crowned, and concealed in the 
concealment of the forms of the beard, but all the others 
were reinstated (in outward form).f 


* This phrase ‘splendour of the sun, who is," &c., evidently refers to the 
sixth Sephira, Tiphereth, or beauty, the splendour of the countenance of 
Microprosopus, while the “ universe ” refers to Malkuth. 

+ While Rabbi Chisqiah was speaking Rabbi Schimeon had this vision of 
the conformations of the beard. 


eeeeeadieh HOLY ASSEMBLY. 149 


344. And what is more, that one (formation), whilst it 
was explained by thy mouth, flamed forth in splendour, 
and was crowned with a crown, and seated upon a throne, 
like a king in the midst of his army. 

545. And when the explanation ceased it ascended, 
and was crowned with a holy crown, and ordained, and 
concealed, and again placed among the forms of the 
holy beard ; and thus with (the forms) all and singular. 

346. Be ye glad, O my holy companions! for surely 
(the universe) shall not be in such a condition until King 
Messiach shall come. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


CONCERNING THE THIRD PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


347. “' ARISE, Rabbi Chisqiah, for the second time.” 

348. We have learned that before Rabbi Chisqiah 
arose, a voice came forth and said: “ One angel doth not 
undertake two messages.” 

349. Rabbi Schimeon was disturbed, and said: 
* Assuredly, let each (of you) speak singly in his place 
(in respect of the symbolism of the seven inferiors); but 
as for myself, and Rabbi Eleazar my son, and Rabbi 
Abba, we (three) refer unto the highest and complete 
perfection (of the whole decad). Arise, Rabbi Chiya." * 


* On a little consideration it will be seen that this meeting of ten of the 
principal Rabbis—viz., Schimeon, Eleazar, Abba, Yehuda, Yosi Ben Jacob, 
Isaac, Chisqiah Ben Rav, Chiya, Yosi, and Yisa—was intended to be sym- 
bolical of the ten Sephiroth, wherein, furthermore, the three first-named 
were also representative of the great trinity of the crown, the king, and the 
queen. In other words, to speak plainly, the whole arrangement of this 


150 K ABBA. 


350. Rabbi Chiya arose, and, commencing, said, 
Jer.i.6: “ AHH ADNI IHVH,;* Ahah Adonai Tetra- 
grammaton! ‘Ah, Lord Tetragrammaton! behold, I 
cannot speak, for I am a child’ 

351. “Therefore, why was it that Jeremiah could 
not speak, seeing that many sayings had passed from 
his lips prior to his saying this? Did he not therefore 
lie (when he said) that which is written (in the text): 
* Behold, I cannot DBR, Deber, speak ' ? 

352. “ But we have learned that God influenced him 
so that he should speak to this end. For tbis is the tradi- 
tion: ‘ What is the difference between DBVR, Debur, 
and AMIRH, Amirah? ‘Amirah’ is, as it were, (simple) 
speech, wherein is required no especial uplifting of the 
voice; ‘Debur’ is public speaking, wherein is indeed 
necessary (considerable) elevation of voice and (loud) 
proclamation of words. 

353. “ Since it is written, Exod. xx: 1: “And Coi 
spake all these words, saying.’ 

354. * And according to what we have learned (by 
tradition), ‘The whole earth heard this DBVR, Debur, 
speech, and the whole earth trembled.’ Because also it 
is written: * VIDBR, Vayedeber, and He spoke forth.’ 
And it is not written: ‘VIAMR, Vayomar, and He 
said.’ 

355. “So also in this place: ‘ Behold! I cannot 
speak, DBR, Deber ;’ that is, as a herald, by declaring 


assembly was closely similar to the constitution of a masonic lodge. Confer 
also § 13 of this book, wherein these three Rabbis further symbolize the — 
“ Three Pillars?’ of the Sephiroth—this assembly of the ten forms of the 
Greater Holy Assembly. But on reference to the ‘‘ Idra Zuta ” we shall find 
that the Lesser Assembly consists of only seven Rabbis, of which the seventh, 
Rabbi Isaac, came in later than the others. These seven were Schimeon, 
Eleazar, Abba, Yehuda, Yosi Ben Jacob, Chiya, and Isaac. (Conf. “ Idra 
Zuta," § 13.) 

* This is the Hebrew text of the Polyglot Bible, but in that of the “ Idra 
Rabba,” “ AHH IHVH ALHIM, Ahah Tetragrammaton Elohim,” is sub- 
stituted for ** Adonai Tetragrammaton.” 


Wee GaALATZR OLY ASSEMBLY. 151 


an address, and convincing the world through the Holy 
Spirit. 

356. “If thus be the matter, this is also to be 
noted which is written: ‘VIDBR IHVH, Vaycedeber 
Tetragrammaton; and Tetragrammaton spake forth 
unto Moses, saying.’ Nevertheless, what one of the 
prophets was so great as Moses? For never was any 
man so worthy as he; for he heard the DBVR, Debur, 
loud voice, like the proclamation of a herald, and he 
feared not, neither did he tremble; while the other 
prophets trembled even at AMIRH, Amirah, the speech, 
and were greatly afraid. 

357. * Also we have learned that through the first and 
second dispositions of the beard it is necessary to pass on 
to the third; like as it is written, Job xxxiii. 29: ‘ Be- 
hold, God worketh all this with man by three paths.’ * 

358. “And come, behold! it is necessary through 
the two first conformations that thou pass on unto the 
third, because the third form is in the midst. 

359. ‘ For, under the nose,f beneath the two nostrils, 
there issueth a certain path, and from that path the 
hairs are wanting. 

360. “ Wherefore are they wanting? Because it is 
written, Mic. vii. 18: * VOVBR OL PSHO, Va-Ghober 
Ghal Peshang, and passing over transgression.’ Therefore 
is that path prepared (namely) for the purpose of passing 
over (transgression). 

361. * And therefore that path resideth beneath the 
nostrils of the nose ; and the hairs do not grow in that 
path, because it subdueth iniquities. 

362. “For it is written: ‘ Passing over transgres- 
sion,’ for the purpose of passing over unto the sacred 
mouth, in order that it may say, ` I HAVE PARDONED.’ 


* The same word which is here rendered thus is translated in the ordinary 
version of the Bible, “oftentimes.” 

t See § 217 of this book, and also the “Book of Concealed Mystery,” 
ii. $ 8. 


152 KABBALAH. 


363. “ We have learned that many threatened vials 
of wrath look for this mouth, and to none among them 
is it manifested ; for it is withdrawn and guarded around; 
it is known, and it is not known. 

364. * We have learned in the ‘ Book of Concealed 
Mystery’: What is this which is written (in this disposi- 
tion of the letters in this) word, PSHO, Peshang? If they 
be first, the word ‘OVBR, Ghober, passing over, hath 
place; if, on the other hand, not so, the word ' PSHO, 
Peshang, transgression,’ hath place. 

365. * What doth this phrase teach, ‘passing over 
transgression’? SHPO, Shephauv, influence, (it teacheth) 
if Sn (in PSnO) be placed before the P.* 

366. “If they are not just, it remameth (ue, the im- 
fluence), and passeth not over into Microprosopus. 

367. * What is the difference between the one and 
the other? In Microprosopus (the matter standeth thus) : 
this path descendeth beneath the nostrils of His nose. 
It is written, Num. xii. ο: ‘And the anger of Tetra- 
grammaton was kindled against him, and He departed.’ 

368. “ What is this, ‘And He departed’? Because 
the spirit of anger departed from those nostrils, and if 
he found any man before him, he was taken away, and 
was no more found. 

369. ** Which is intimated in these words, Isa. xl. 7: 


* This is simply a transposition of the two first letters of the word in 
question. Of course, the same letters being retained, though their relative 
places are changed, the numeration of the two words by Gematria will be 
identical. Butit is worth our while to notice what the numeration of this word 
is, especially as Rabbi Chiya has not examined it. P -ESir- O. = 804 300+ 
70 = 450 = TuN, Than, the dragon. Ergo, according to the exegetical 
rule of Gematria, the dragon will be the symbol of transgression. But 
450 is also the numeration of SuPO, influence ; therefore is the dragon & 
symbol also of influence and of power. But * this influence passeth over into 
Microprosopus; " now one of the qabalistical axioms given by Pistorius is: 
*' Paradise is the sephirotic tree. In the midst thereof the great Adam 
is 'Tiphereth." (See Introduction.) Therefore the influence passing, 
over into Microprosopus is also the serpent entering into the garden of 


Eden. 


Ue GRP ATR HOLY ASSEMBLY 153 


‘Because the Spirit of Tetragrammaton bloweth upon 
it.’ 

370. “ But concerning Macroprosopus it is written: 
* Passing over transgression.’ 

ον οἱ. written, Job xxxvii. 21: ‘ And the 
spirit (wind) passeth over and hath cleansed them.’ 

372. * Also we have learned that on this account it 
is thus written: ‘Passing over transgression’ in that 
path. Also concerning that (passage), Exod. xii 23: 
* And He passeth over to smite the Egyptians.’ 

373. “Blessed is his portion who is worthy in this 
matter. And this is the third conformation of the path 
of the venerable, holy, and excellent beard of the Ancient 
of the Ancient Ones.” 

374. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: ‘‘ May God, the 
Holy One, blessed be He, be gracious unto thee, and 
protect thee most abundantly. 

375. “ Also we have learned: What is this which is 
written, ‘With rejoicing will I rejoice in Tetragram- 
maton?’ Concerning the Ancient of Days, is it said: ‘For 
He is the praise of all things.’ 

376. “We have learned, whensoever that path of 
the beard of the Ancient of Days is manifested, all the 
authors of lamentation and mourning, and all the exe- 
cutors of judgment, are silent and hidden; nor is there 
one of them who openeth his mouth to do harm, because 
that path is manifested in due form. 

377. * Hence also he who toucheth that mouth, and 
adviseth it to keep silence," pointeth out this path with 
his finger; and that is the symbol denoting the Holy 
Ancient One. (Others read: Because that path is the 
symbol of silence; hence he who looked at another, and 
adviseth him to be silent, toucheth this path, which is 
the symbol, &c.) 


* Meaning symbolically the idea of judgment. 


154 KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER XY. 


CONCERNING THE FOURTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


378. THE hair is disposed in the fourth conformation, 
and it descendeth beneath the mouth from the one side 
even unto the other side. 

379. That is intimated (in the saying of Micah) 
in these words: “Of the remnant of his heritage :” 
LSHAIRITH NCHLUTHV, Lishairith Nachalatho. 

380. Like as itis said in 2 Kings xix. 4: “ And thou 
shalt lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.” 
Where every part that is found truly remaining is called 
the remnant. : 

381. For it is written, Zeph. in. 13: “The remnant 
of Israel, SHARITH ISHRAL, Sharith Israel, shall not 
do iniquity.” 


CHAPTER Yar 


CONCERNING THE FIFTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


382. THE fifth conformation. Another path goeth 
forth beneath the mouth. This is that which is written 
in the saying of Micah: “LA HCnHZIQ LOD APY, 
Lo Hecheziq Lead Apo, He hath not kept his anger for 
ever" ‘ Arise! Rabbi Yosi!” 

383. Rabbi Yosi arose, and commencing said, Ps. 
exliv. 15 : ““' Blessed is the people that is in such a case ; 
blessed is the people whose God is Tetragrammaton.’ 

384. “ * Blessed is the people that is in such a case.’ 
What is this ‘SHKKH LV, Shehakah Lo, That is in such 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 155 


a case?’ Like as itis said in Est. vii. τος ‘ And the 
wrath of the king was appeased, SHKKH, Shekakah ; 
that is, ‘ Became quiet from his wrathfulness. 

385. * Another exposition: He was appeased through 
his wrath, which is intimated in these words, Num, xi. 
I5: ‘And if Thou dealest thus with me, kill me, I pray 
Thee, out of hand, if I have found grace in Thy sight.' 

“< Kill me, I pray Thee, out of hand ;' this is judg- 
ment of judgments. But ‘blessed is the people whose 
God is Tetragrammaton ;’ this is mercies of mercies. 

387. “ Another exposition: SHKIKH, Shekaka, is the 
name which includeth all names,* in consequence of 
which that Holy Blessed One maketh His wrath to pass 
away, and caused Microprosopus to be at peace, and 
taketh away all those extraneous (matters) from the 
midst. 

388. “ We have learned through Barietha (or the 
tradition given forth without the holy city), that that path 
of the conformation of the holy supernal Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones, which descendeth in the beard beneath 
the nostrils of the nose, and this inferior path, are equal 
in every way, in such a manner that that which is 
below is like that which is above.[ The superior (path) 
is called ‘ passing over transgression’; the inferior, ‘ He 
hath not kept His anger for ever.’ 


* It is not at first sight evident why this word should be the “name which 
includeth all names.” But if we examine it by Gematria we shall soon see 
the reason. SAKKH, Sx1+K+K+H = 300+20+20+5 = 345 = SnMH, 
Shemah = Ha Shem,The Name. This title Shemah is applied to the Tetra- 
grammaton frequently as being the name of all names, and therefore SuK KH 
is taken as concealing Tetragrammaton. 

+ Compare the precept in the Smaragdine tablet of Hermes Trismegistus : 
“That which is below is like that which is above, and that which is above is 
like that which is below, for the performance of the miracles of the one sub- 
stance. ' Thisisthe fundamental principle of all the ancient mystic doctrines, 
whether qabalistical, mythological, alchemical, or magical; and in this 
formula all are contained. As is God, so is the universe ; as is the Creator 
the Supernal Man, so is the created the inferior man ; as Macrocosm, so 
Microcosm ; as eternity, so life! 


156 KABBALAH. 


389. ‘ Also we have learned this: ‘ He hath not kept,’ 
i.e., there 15 no place wherein anger can remain. Like as 
in the superior there is opportunity given for taking away 
(anger), so also in the inferior is the (same opportunity) 
afforded. 

390. “ We have learned this: whensoever in this 
Ancient One, the most concealed of all, this path is 
uncovered, it is well for all the inferior (paths) ;* for then 
appeareth counsel for doing good to them ail. 

391. “But when it is withdrawn, and is not un- 
uncovered, there is no counsel, neither is there any who 
knoweth Him, save Himself.t 

392. “ Like as also none knoweth the superior Eden, 
save Himself, save Him, the Ancient of the Ancient Ones. 

393. “ And concerning this it is written, Ps. xcii. 6: 
‘O Lord how excellent are Thy works! Thy thoughts 
are very deep!’ ” 

394. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “May thy 
works be reckoned in order in the world to come by the 
Ancient of the Ancient Ones!” 


CHAPTER AWM. 


CONCERNING THE SIXTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


595. THE hair is arranged in the sixth conformation, 
and ascendeth from below upwards, and toucheth the 


* That is, the lower forms of the Sephiroth. 

+ Himself, HVA, Hoa, whom we can only symbolize by this pronoun ; 
He, Who is the Absolute ; He, Who is beyond us ; that awful and unknow- 
able Crown, Who hath said, I Αμ; in Whom is neither past nor future, He 
Who is the ErERNAL Present. Therefore is He, Hoa, the Father, known of 
none save the Son, IHVH, and him to whom the Son will reveal Him. For 
none can see Hoa and live, for they would be absorbed in Him. 


Ιου, ασ HOLY ASSEMBLY. 157 


circles of most excellent fragrance, even unto the 
beginning of the mouth above ; and the hair descendeth 
from the beginning (of the mouth abore) unto the begin- 
ning of the opening of the mouth below. ‘‘ Arise thou! 
Rabbi Yisa, and expound this conformation." 

396. Rabbi Yisa arose, and commenced, and said, 
Js: liv. το: “* And thy blessing shall not depart from 
thee 17 

ο; Uds written: ‘ And in everlasting com- 
passion have I had mercy upon thee.’ 

398. “ Do not these verses contradict one another ? 
They do not. Tor thisis what we have learned : there is 
given a compassion (of one hind), and again there is given 
a compassion of another kind. For the one is the interior 
compassion, and the other is the external compassion. 

399. ' The interior compassion is that of which we 
have spoken concerning the Ancient of Days, and that ig 
concealed in this part of the beard, which is called the 
angle of the beard. 

400. * Neither is it advisable for a man to destroy 
this part (of his beard) because of this interior compassion 
of the Ancient of Days. 

401. “ And therefore is it written concerning the 
inferior priesthood, Lev. xxi. 5: ‘They shall not make 
baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the 
angle of their beard.’ 

402. “Wherefore? Lest they should destroy the 
path of the Mercy of the Ancient One. For also the 
priesthood is (symbolically) referred unto this path. 

403. ‘“‘ Also we have learned in the ‘ Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery’ that every work existeth in order that it 
may procure increase for Mercy, and that it may establish 
the same; also that this is not to be cut off nor removed 
from the world. 

404. '* This is that which is written: ‘And My 
Compassion shall not depart from thee. Namely, the 
Compassion of the Ancient of Days. 


158 KABBALAH. 


405. “(But when it is said in another text), eum 
mercy, OVLM, Olahm, for ever (this is the sense), the 
mercy which is called ‘mercy for ever’ is the second 
form concerning which it is written, Ps. lxxxix. 2: ‘I 
have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever.’ 

406. '' And this compassion of the Ancient of Days 15 
the mercy of truth, And (this phrase) ‘mercy of truth’ is 
not said concerning the life of the body, but concerning 
the life of the soul. 

407. “And therefore is it written, Mic. vii 18: 
‘Since He Himself wisheth Mercy.’ This is the sixth 
conformation of the venerable beard of the Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones.” 


CHAPTER πα 


CONCERNING THE SEVENTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
i MACROPROSOPUS, 


408. THE seventh conformation is that wherein the 
hair is wanting, and there appear two apples in the circles 
of fragrance, fair and beautiful of aspect. 

409. Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. 
ii. 3: “ ‘Like as the apple-tree among the trees of the 
wood, so is my beloved among the sons.’ 

410. * What is the apple-tree? Like as this in itself 
hath three colours, so do the two apples of the holy blessed 
one contain six colours. 

411. “And those two apples which are the seventh 
conformation include all the six conformations before 
mentioned. 

412. “And concerning them is that passage (to be 
taken in), Prov. xvi. 15: ‘In the light of the counte- 
nance of the King is life.’ 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 159 


413. '' Also we have learned that from those apples 
goeth forth the life of the universe, and it giveth joy 
unto Microprosopus ; like as it is written, Num. vi. 24: 
‘The Lord maketh His countenance to shine upon thee.’ 

414. “And it is written: ‘In the light of the coun- 
tenance of the King is life? ‘In the light of the 
countenance of the King. Those are the two apples of 
the circles of fragrance of which we have spoken. 

415. * ‘The Lord make His countenance to shine 
upon thee. Here is understood the exterior countenance 
which when it shineth blesseth the universe. 

416. '' And we have learned that whensoever those 
externallights shine He blesseth the whole world, and 
wrath is no longer found in the universe. 

417. * And if these externals (do this), how much 
more do these two apples, which ever shine, which ever 
are joyful ! 

418. “This is a tradition, given forth without the 
city.^ ‘When those two apples are disclosed, Micro- 
prosopus appeareth in joy; for all those inferior. lights 
are joyful; and all those inferiors shine; and all the 
worlds rejoice, and are perfected in all perfection; and 
all things rejoice and shine, and no good thing is want- 
ing; all things are satisfied at once; all things rejoice 
together at the same time. 

419. “Come, behold! "The external countenance at 
times shineth, at times is obscured; and therefore is it 
written: ‘The Lord make His face to shine upon thee.’ 
And, Ps. i.: ‘And cause His face to shine upon us. 
Selah,’ 

420. “ Whence (we learn), that it is not always 
(luminous), but only when those superior apples are un- 
covered. 

421. “This have we learned by tradition. ‘Those 
hidden apples shine, and are ever brilliant; and from 


* I suppose this means later than the Captivity. 


160 ΚΗ͂Ρ. 


them proceed rays in three hundred and seventy* direc- 
tions; and in them all the six (preceding) conformations 
of the beard are included.’ 

422. “This is that ‘which is said, Mic. ΠΡ 
‘May He return and have mercy upon us!’ May He 
return, that is, again ; whence it is to be noticed that 
sometimes they are concealed and sometimes uncovered ; 
wherefore it is said: ‘ May He return and have mercy 
upon us!’ 

423. “ And in that which is inferior (correspondeth to 
this form) the name, AMTu, Amath, Truth. ‘This is the 
seventh conformation, which includeth the six first, in 
the two apples of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones.” 


CHAPTER XIX, 


CONCERNING THE EIGHTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


424. THE eighth conformation. There goeth forth a 
certain tress of hairs surrounding the beard, and they 
hang down evenly into the heart. “ Arise thou, Eleazar 
my son, and expound this conformation." 

425. Rabbi Eleazar, his son, arose, and commenced, 
and said: “ All things depend from the influx, even the 
Book of the Law in the Temple. ‘This have we under- 
stood from the ‘Book of Concealed Mystery, and it 
speaketh thus. 

426. ‘‘ Therefore do not then all things depend from 
the influx? Also we have learned that the Book of the 
Law must be holy, and its covering holy, and the Temple 
holy. 

* 370 = OSs, Aush = formation, action, creation. And the least 


number of 3+70 = 37 = 10 = Malkuth, the decad of the Sephiroth. 
+ Expressed by the re in return. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 161 


427. “ Also it is written, Isa. vi. 4 : ‘ And they called 
one unto another and said: Holy, holy, holy!' Behold 
these three (repetitions of the word * holy’) unto which the 
Book of the Law correspondeth, for its covering is holy, 
and the Temple is holy; and the book itself is holy. 

428. * And thus the Law hath been constructed in 
triple holiness, in three degrees, in three days, (but) the 
Schechinah (4s) in the three (following) which are the 
Table, the Ark, and the Temple ; and in the same manner 
it dependeth from the Book of the Law, and that depen- 
deth from the Influx. 

429. Also it is written, Jer. x. 2: ‘Be ye not 
dismayed at the signs (or influences) of the heavens.’ 
Because if they exist in holiness, in the same way they 
must depend from the Influx. 

430. But thus have we read in the * Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery " that this venerable holy tress of hair, 
wherein all the locks of the beard hang down, is called 
the Influx. Wherefore? Because that all the holinesses 
of the holinesses of all holinesses depend from that 
Influx. 

431. “And in the Book of the Law, although it is 
holy, the ten holinesses* do not descend, until it be 
brought into the Temple. But after that it is brought 
into the Temple it is called holy with the ten holinesses. 

432. “As in the above instance mention is not 
made of the Temple save when the ten holinesses are 
associated with it. 

433. ‘Also we have learned that all things depend 


* This of course refers to the ten Sephiroth. In the Sepher Yetzirah, 
SPR ITzIRH, a very ancient and mystical qabalistical book attributed to 
Abraham the Patriarch, which treats of the creation of the universe through 
‘the symbolism of the ten numbers (Sephiroth), and the twenty-two letters, 
together called the thirty-two paths of wisdom, where the ten nunibers are 
derived into a tetrad and a hexad (the latter consisting of the four cardinal 
points of the compass, together with height and depth), this phrase is 
employed: “ And in the midst of the hexad is the Holy Temple." This book 
«« Yetzirah ” is not included in the present volume. 


M 


162 KABBALAH. 


from that Influx which is (symbolized by) that tress of 
(hair of the beard) from which all (the other) hairs depend, 

434. “Why is this called the Influx (or influence) ? 
Because from it depend the influences and the influences 
of the influences, and from it come forth those which are 
above and those which are below. 

435. “ And because it dependeth, and that in it all 
the things of the universe depend, superiors and inferiors ; 
also in the last place the Book of the Law, which isin the 
Temple, and is crowned with the ten holinesses, is not 
excepted hence with the other holinesses. All things 
depend from it (this conformation, namely). 

436. * And he who beholdeth that form, before him 
are they subjected and inflected (others read: ‘all sins 
are subjected, £c?) according to that which is written: 
‘IKBVSH OVNVTHINV, Yekebosh Auonothino, He hath 
pardoned our iniquities’ (or He hath subjected, &c.).” 

437. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “O my son! 
blessed be thou by the Holy of the Holy Ones, the One 
Ancient before all.” 


CHAPTER XX. 


CONCERNING THE NINTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


438. THE ninth conformation. The hairs are mingled 
with those hairs that hang down, neither is one pre- 
eminent above another. ‘‘ Arise, Rabbi Abba!" 

439. Rabbi Abba arose and said: “ These are the 
hairs which are mingled with these which hang down, 
and they are called *the deep places of the sea, because 
they depart from above in the fluid places of the brain. 

440. “ And from that place are cast out all the lords 


Πα. τας HOLY ASSEMBLY. 163 


who are the exactors of the debts (of the trespasses) of 
mankind, and they are subjugated.” 

441. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “ Blessed be 
thou of the Ancient of Days!” 


CHAPTER XXI. 


CONCERNING THE TENTH AND ELEVENTH PARTS OF THE 
BEARD OF MACROPROSOPUS. 


442. THE tenth conformation. The hairs descend 
beneath the beard, and cover the throat beneath the 
beard. “ Arise, Rabbi Yehuda.” 

443. Rabbi Yehuda arose, and commenced, and said, 
Isa. ii. το: ““' And they shall enter into the holes of the 
rocks, and into the caves of the earth, from the counte- 
nance of the terror of the Lord of Hosts, and from the 
glory of His majesty, when He shall arise to shake terribly 
the earth.’ 

444. “ ‘From the countenance of the Terror * of the 
Lord.’ It is to be carefully noted that that which is 
exterior is called the Terror of Tetragrammaton. 

445. “‘ And from the Glory of His Majesty.’ These 
are the hairs beneath the beard, and they are called the 
Glory of His Majesty. 

446. “ (But) these two (conformations agree with 
§§ 268, 269, ante); the tenth with ‘Thou shalt give truth 
unto Jacob.’ 


* PCuD, Pachad, Terror, is a title of the fifth Sephira, Geburah, Strength, 
to which the divine name of Elohim Gibor, the Elohim of Strength, is 
referred. It is likewise to be remembered that from this Sephira the Pillar 
of Justice takes its title, which includes the third, fifth, and eighth Sephiroth; 
Binah, Geburah, and Hod; Understanding, Strength or Terror, and Splen- 
dour. Mars, "the star of the unconquerered will," is also referred to this 
fifth Sephira. 


M 2 


164 KABBALAH. 


447. “And the eleventh, because one hair is not 


pre-eminent over another hair, with ‘mercy unto 
Abraham,’ ” 


CHAPTER XXII. 


CONCERNING THE TWELFTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


448. THE twelfth conformation is that the hairs do 
not hang over the mouth, and that the mouth is bare on 
every part, and that beautiful are the hairs surrounding 
it, so that there may be no molestation there, as is fit. 

449. But wherein consisteth the molestation ? Doubt- 
less it is frequently said, “ If judgment exist in the place 
of judgment (or, * If judgment follow after judgment”), 
molestation ariseth.” 

450. Therefore are the hairs of the beard either 
(symbolical of) molestation or judgment, while the other 
parts appear to (symbolize) mercy. 

451. Surely it is said for this reason, because the 
breathings forth of the Spirit upon Microprosopus are 
not molestations. 

452. For we have learned that from that holy and 
excellent mouth of the Holy of the Holy Ones the Spirit 
breaketh forth. 

453. What spirit? The Spirit which floweth forth 
upon Microprosopus, that it may enshroud Him. 

454. And with that Spirit are all those * veiled 
which are inferior. And when that Spirit goeth forth, 
then is it divided into 37,000 aspects,t of which each one 
is expanded, but only in its proper place. 

* 'That is, the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Sephiroth 
which form Microprosopus ; and the tenth, which is the Bride. 


T That is, 37 in the material, or Asiah = ZL, Zal = profession, or LZ, 
Laz = diversion of force. 


ο ον 165 


455. And he who is worthy to be enshrouded is en- 
shrouded by (the Spirit). 

456. And therefore hairs are not found upon the holy 
mouth, because thence the Spirit rusheth forth ; neither 
is it necessary that any (extraneous things) whatsoever 
should be mingled therewith or approach thereto, 

457. And that (mouth) is very secret, because to it 
nothing adhereth, nor doth anything touch upon it from 
above or below; and it is concealed in the secret of 
secrets, so that it cannot be known. 

458. In fact, it is not formed, nor doth it exist* 
(properly speaking) in this conformation. 

459. And because that Spirit which proceedeth unto 
the exteriors, and wherewith the true prophets have been 
overshadowed, is called the mouth of Tetragrammaton. 

460. But herein, in the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, 
is it not made manifest, nor is there any who knoweth 
His Spirit save Himself. 

461. And therefore are the hairs of (the beard) of 
equal length around the mouth ; and this latter 1s bare in 
every part. 

462. And herein have our fathers put their trust, that 
they might be overshadowed by that Spirit which is 
developed in multitudinous aspects, each in its proper 
place, wherewith all the equal hairs are surrounded. 

463. This is that which is written in that passage of 
Micah: “ Which Thou hast sworn unto our fathers." 

464. And this is the holy and excellent twelfth con- 
formation, from which, linked together, depend twelve 
limitations above and twelve limitations below; even 
twelve limitations, according unto the twelve tribes of our 
fathers. 

465. This is that which is written: ‘‘ Which Thou 
hast sworn unto our fathers." 


* Meaning that in this place it is the conformations of the beard and not 
the mouth that are being described. 


166 KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


CONCERNING THE THIRTEENTH PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MACROPROSOPUS. 


466. THE thirteenth conformation. The hairs which 
are beneath the beard hang down on this side and on 
that in beautiful and excellent dignity, and form a cover- 
ing even unto the chest, and nothing is seen of the 
countenance and of the places of fragrance save those 
two brilliant and beautiful apples. 

467. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: “O how 
blessed is his portion who is found in this excellent holy 
assembly," wherein we are (assembled)! Blessed is his 
portion in this world and in the world to come. 

468. * For we are seated in that excellent holiness 
which surroundeth us. 

469. * And all those excellent conformations are co- 
ordinated, and crowned, and placed round about, each 
in its own (proper) position, in the holy form of the 
beard. | 

470. * And this thirteenth disposition is the beautiful 
disposition which exciteth in itself so great desire that 
the headf ariseth towards it. 

471. “From it depend all those which are compre- 
hended in Microprosopus; from it depend alike those 
which are supernal, those which are inferior. 

472. * This is the form of perfection which con- 


* Because this assembly of ten Rabbis, as 1 have before remarked, was 
intended to typify the ten Sephiroth and their grouping. 

+ This somewhat obscure text means this: The number of the parts of the 
beard are 13, which are now completed in this disposition. But 13 = ACHD, 
Achad, Unity, and also AH BH, Ahebah, Love. Hence love of unity ariseth 
when the 13 are complete. And the head of Macroprosopus ariseth, because 
that is Kether, the first Sephira, the number one, unity. 


ο ο τος HOLY ASSEMBLY. 167 


summateth all the dispositions, and which perfecteth all 
things. 

473. “ We have learned by tradition. Those parts* 
are called QDM, Qadam,f{ ancient days, days first of the 
first. But those which are found in Microprosopus are 
called OVLM, Olahm, everlasting days, or days of the 
ages, 

474. * Also we have learned that those QDM, Qadam, 
ancient days, are all conformed in the conformations of 
the beard, wherein is composed the Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones, the Concealed of the Concealed Ones. 
But this thirteenth (conformation) comprehendeth them. 

475. * And all the concealed superiors and inferiors 
are concealed in it, and they are comprehended in that 
Influx from which all things emanate; like as it is said : 

476. * Ànd that day is not comprehended in them, 
seeing it comprehendeth all things. 

477. * And in that time wherein is stirred up the 
Ancient of Days in the superior conformations, that is 
called one day wherein He ariseth to magnify His beard. 

479. * Which is intimated in those words, Zech. 
xiv. 7: ‘One day which is known to the Lord.’ 

479. “That alone prevaileth over all, that includeth 
all things that is called by the known name. 

480. “For thus we have learned. In that place 
where there is day there is also night, seeing that day 
cannot exist without night. 

481. * But because in that time shall be the time of 
the dignity of the beard, that day is found alone. 

482. * It is called neither day nor night, for it is not 


* 'That is, the thirteen conformations of the beard. 

+ And hence is Macroprosopus called the ** Ancient of Days." Qadam 
also means the east, eastward. ‘‘Tetragrammaton Elohim planted a garden, 
MQDM, Miqedem, eastward (or of ancient time), in Eden. It is worthy of 
notice that the Gematria of QDM and OVLM are 144 and 146 respectively ; 
the least numbers of which are 9 and 2—Yesod and Chokmah, foundation and 


wisdom. 
1 By way of synthesis, as if it were a repetition of the rest conjointly. 


168 KABBALAH. 


called day except for our (better understanding of the sym- 
bolism involved), neither is it called night except for the 
same reason. 

483. ‘‘ And because that form includeth all things, 
hence nothing whatsoever is known or seen concerning it. 

484. ‘ And from it streameth down the oil of magnifi- 
cence in thirteen directions, which flow down upon all 
the inferiors in order that they may shine forth. 

485. “In that oil are consummated the thirteen parts 
of the holy and excellent beard. 

486. * And those forms which are in that beard are 
disposed and descend in many directions, neither can it 
be seen how they are extended nor how they arise. 

487. “They are hidden in all things, and they are 
concealed in all things; and no man knoweth their 
place, except Him, the Ancient One. 

488. “In their expansion are they all included, like 
as it is said : 

489. * He is known, and He is not known; He is 
concealed, and He is manifest. 

490. * Concerning Him it is written, Isa. xlii. 8: 
‘ANI IHVH. HVA,* Ami Tetragrammaton Hoa, This is 
My name, and My glory I give not unto another.’ 

491. * Also it is written, Ps. c. 2: HVA, Hoa, He, 
hath made us, and not we ourselves.’ 

492. * Also it is written, Dan. vii. 9: * The Ancient 
of Days did sit," that is, He remained in His place, and 
Him hath no man known. He sitteth, but He is not 
found. 

493. “Also it is written, Ps. exxxix. 14: ‘I will 
praise Thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.’ ” 


* “ Ani Tetragrammaton Hoa, This is My name ;” for in this are contained 
Macroprosopus, Microprosopus, and the Tetragrammaton. ANI represents 
Microprosopus ; HVA, Macroprosopus; and IH VH is between them. Ani 
is 53 and Hoa is 12, which together give 65, which is ADNI, Adonai, Lord ; 
and IHVH = 26, which added hereunto is gr = AMN, Amen. Now, apart 
from the sacred ideas we attach to amen, it is well to know that the ancient 
Egyptians called their greatest Deity.Amen, AMN,Amen-Ra, and Ra= Light, 
AVR in Hebrew ; Amen our Light, the light of the two countenances. 


Wee CREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 169 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
CONCLUSION OF THE MATTER CONCERNING MACROPROSOPUS. 


494. RABBI SCHIMEON spake unto his companions, and 
said: * When that veil is expanded (by which is to be 
understood the representation of the beard of Macroprosopus) 
which ye behold above us,* I see that all the conforma- 
tions have descended therein, and that they shine forth 
in that place. (Now like as if he intended to say, AMN, 
Amen, the discourse concerning Macroprosopus being finished, 
he deseribeth this particular symbolism, which 15 contained in 
the ensuing symbols.) 

495. “ And a certain covering, even the splendour of 
the most holy and blessed God (otherwise the opening of 
holiness ; but by this is understood the Tetragrammaton, 
which, together with the name, ADNI, Adonai, maketh the 
number of the word AMN, Amen, that is, 91): is ex- 
panded through four columns on four sides (which are 
the four letters of the holy name, by which he saith that 
space 1s surrounded). 

496. ** One cvuiumn is so placed that it reacheth from 
the lowest unto the highest. (This is the Kingdom of 
the emanations,t the base and lowest part of the whole 
system $ of emanation, because it is said to ascend from the 
lowest part of the middle column} even unto the summit of 
the Crown.||) 

497. * And therein is a certain MGRVPIA,S 
Megerophia, vessel containing fire (for like as the fire on 
the altar could not be touched with bare hands, so that 

* Again alluding to their symbolical representation of the ten Sephirotu. 

T Malkuth, the tenth Sephira. + The Sephiroth. 

§ Or Villar of Mildness, consisting of the first, sixth, ninth, and tenth 
Sephiroth. 


| Kether. **Malkuth is Kether after another manner,” says one of the 


qabalistic axioms of Pistorius. 
“i I believe the best translation of Mezerophia is a “ fire shovel.” Knorr 


de Rosenroth makes it “ uncus focarius.’’ 


170 KABBALAH. 


name, Tetragrammaton, cannot be touched and pronounced 
by the mouth, but it is touched and produced by ADNI, 
Adonai, which is SgM, Sham, His name; for SuM and 
MGEVPIA both yield 340 by Gematria); and in 
the fire-containing vessel are four keys,* sharp on 
every side (for such was the form of the keys, in order that 
they might draw aside the veil, as a lock 4s shot back by 
a key. But the four letters of the name ADNI, Adonai, 
are hereby to be wnderstood, which are inserted into and 
united with the four letters IHV.H, in this manner, 
IAHDVNHI); which seize upon that veil, and with- 
draw it from the superiors. 

498. “And thus in the second column,t and the 
third column and the fourth column (that is, the four 
letters are applied to the other four letters, as hath just been 
said). 

499. * And between one column and another column 
are contained eighteen f bases of columns (here is to be 
understood the name expounded through the seventy-two § 
names or numbers ; for either pertain unto Macroprosopus, 
and four times eighteen yieldeth seventy-two): and they 
shine forth with brilliancy in the openings carved out in 


* Quatuor claves tradite sunt in manu Domini murdi, quas non tradidit 
neque ulli Angelo, neque seraphino: clavis pluvie: clavis sustentationis : 
clavis sepulchorum: clavis sterilitatis, &c. (Zanolini: * Lexicon Chaldzo- 
Rabbinicum," art. MPTuCu, root PTuCn.) 

+ These four columns also refer to the four worlds of Atziloth, Briab, 
Yetzirah, and Asiah. (See Introduction.) 

$ 18 = Cal = Life. 

$ In Exodus xiv. are three verses (19, 20, and 21), which each 
consist of 72 letters. Now, if these three verses be written at length one 
above another, the first from right to left, the second from left to right, 
and the third from right to left (or, as the Greeks would say, boustro- 
phedon), they will give 72 columns of three letters each. Then each column 
will be a word of three letters, and as there are 72 columns, there will be 72 
words of three letters, each of which will be the 72 names of the Deity 
alluded to in the text. And these are called the Schemahamphorasch, 
or thedivided name. By writing the verses all from right to left, instead of 
boustrophedon, &c., there will be other sets of 72 names obtainable. (See 
annexed Table of the Schemahamphorasch.) 


ID 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 


uno 'zZ 
‘IJ '1Z furoqox “οὐ íuevy 69 foqeqo 99 ‘nery ‘49 ‘bruo 90 íqeure(q 59 ‘qoop ‘rg ‘nuny ‘Eo bed 'σο 
‘gout A ‘19 faez3o]y "o9 € your] 65 qj X “gS «ποιο ἐπ troq "95 “Π9η0 55 ΤΟΝ “VS ‘vuon ‘ES turouny 'z$ 
tusvqov]p "I$ fruoq "οὔ toqeA Οὔ fuer ‘gh freysny zb ‘uny οὗ toeg "SP το. tr iquaoA Ἔν tN CV 
seye ΙΡ ‘zog οὗ fuvyoy '6£ fumvyy “gf ‘ruy ΖΕ :Ῥυαο]ῇ ος Sbaaoyy “SE ‘yoryor “PE foyoax Ἔξ i10qs0A σε. 
‘qeyory ΙΕ Suny ος ‘tA '6z Syeuyg “ge SyyoroX “Zz ívepgp ‘oz «Ποιον “Se togeyo “pe iwe[o]q Ἔς tery CIC 
CHRON 'IZ fpoyeg ‘oz OAOT '61 SOY gr fuer "Zr wobe ‘or “11911 51 fyRqopy "Pr "10201 “Er *nvqvjp "σι 
‘AUY 11 Epey Οἱ 12911 6 Syyeyey ^g íexy “ὁ ‘YPT ο * ysvyepy ^S "Ποια cv ‘41g € “π0λ “Ὁ nyog Ἱ 


('o01poz oy} fo soo4Dop o1? fo soremumnb ZL ay} t0 o4 
oym ‘paurniqo 9.0 spabuy cL fo sownu ay} *poppo oq [01 4011 HI «o Ty SUDU p4] 0891] fo 11099 οἱ JT) 


eS LS ο 65S o9 ιο zw £9 9 "o 99 ο 329 GO ο M keL 
He sr NS mliwolulagiliBbiAalil@)@o);)o;A ll m |e | T ΠΙ H 
Ennn υπ πι ΠΠ 1. Τὶ ΙΙ|5Β|ΧΙΠΙ EN 
WRN |} FT Pe πι A! TE OIN at NIY tao ΙΤ Ι HNENM 
DO Nc Gk UP cv ει vv — Sb ον dp ey οἵ ο SGC 
plete LZ EG | πι πο ΤΙΠ. Αι US "| Vo 
Ds ο dT M i ΡΠ; a ea L8 X xe NUI NM NN A 
Tees |) hb |) ΙΙ A | τι ουδ i mek | wd EA ο ΕΙ 
Un ο". ας. co Getz Se woe c Sc bz ος ΙΕ σὲ tt ge . ο 
Ee | Πω τι | ee le ie | de) oe] ας el | a 
| wi | qe ums eee lu | A o las ποια ΠΠ H 
Tidiga N. | WW Su vui 1d oe CN 
I ζ ε V E 9 L 9 6 or @ zr ει #1 SEMI ο gi 
ΧΙ tlal A μα τπτ awe!) τις δι Ol πι ie) ^ I 
πι cr τπτ el | a i oe Se ae αυ es v πῃ 
Melia Se | Gl a) ΠΤ ΙΤ By N te) el eee ie) I 


'HOSVHOHdANVHVNWHOS YHL 


172 KABBALAH. 


that veil, and so on all four sides. (By the “ openings 
carved out” is to be understood the exposition of the name, 
Tetragrammaton.) 

500. “ I beheld those forms which shine above it, and 
await the words of our lips, that they may be crowned 
and raised each in its own place. 

50I. “ And when they are expounded by our lips, 
they ascend singly and are crowned, and are disposed in 
that order which is here given forth by the mouth of 
whosoever amongst us (happeneth to be expounding them). 

502. * And whensoever any one amongst us openeth 
his mouth, so that he may speak concerning any con- 
formation, that form is localized and awaiteth the voice 
which goeth forth from our lips, and then it ascendeth 
in its place and is crowned. 

503. * And all the columns on this side and on that 
side rejoice (here are understood the holy living creatures, 
the cherubim, which were before the columns, and the chiefs of 
the angelic guards, and they are said to have come hither) ; 
because they hear that which before they knew not.* 
And in the sound of your voices are heard the rushing 
of countless chariots (the noise of the wings of the hosts of 
the angelic chariots of God, rushing onwards); and they 
stand here around you in multitudes, awaiting the speech 
of your voice. | 

504. *O blessed are ye in the world to come! 
because all the words which go forth from your mouth 
are all holy, all true, which err not, neither on the right 
nor yet on the left (seeing they are the holy names of 
God ). 


* I must again remind the reader that Rabbi Schimeon and his com- 
panions are speaking as symbolizing the action of the Sephiroth in the 
creation, and that when it is said the angels, &c , wait for the words from 
their lips, it signifies symbolically the way in which the angels, &c., were 
created by the word of the Deity in his Sephirotic form. And when it is 
said that “‘they hear that which before they knew not," it signifies the 
creation of forms, powers, and attributes which at the beginning of time 
existed not. 


Gee OCReAIER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 173 


505. ‘“‘God, the holy and blessed one, rejoiceth to 
hear these things, and He listeneth unto these words 
until He himself shall give sentence, for in the world 
to come all these holy words shall be enumerated for 
the second time. 

506. “Concerning you is it written, Cant. vii. 9: 
‘And the roof of thy mouth, like the best wine for 
my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips 
of those that are asleep to speak.’ 

507. “ What is this? ‘Causing the lips of those 
that are asleep to speak.’ Because even in the world 
to come shall your lips utter the words of the law before 
Him.” 


CHAPTER XXV. 
THE INGRESS OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


508. * Now take ye your places, and apply the science 
(the Qabalah) to describe how the parts of Microprosopus 
are conformed, and how He is clothed with His confor- 
mations, from the forms of the Ancient of Days, the 
Holy of the Holy Ones, the Withdrawn of the Withdrawn 
ones, the Concealed one of All. 

509. ** For now wisdom requireth that ye judge a true 
judgment, becoming and honourable; so that ye may 
dispose all the conformations as accurately as possible. 

510. * But the conformations of Microprosopus are 
disposed from the forms of Macroprosopus; and His con- 
stituent parts are expanded on this side and on that 
under à human form, so that there may be manifest in 
Him the Spirit of the Concealed One in every part. 

511. “So that He may be placed upon His throne, 
because it is written, Ezek. i. 26: ‘And above the like- 


174 KABBALAH. 


ness of a throne, the appearance as the likeness of a 
man upon it above.’ 

512. “ ‘Like as the appearance of a man;’ because 
that (form) includeth all forms. ‘ Like as the appearance 
of a man ;' because He includeth all names. ‘ Like as the 
appearance of a man. Because He includeth all secret 
things which have been said or propounded before the 
world was created, even although they have not been 
substituted herein." * 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
CONCERNING THE EDOMITE KINGS. 


513. BEHOLD ! this have we learned in the '* Book of 
Concealed Mystery ": that the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones before that He prepared His conformations f (in the 
equilibrium of balance) formed certain kings, collected 
certain kings, and gave due proportion unto certain kings; 
but they only subsisted (for a time) until He could expel 
them ; and in that time hath He concealed them. 

514. This is intimated in those words, Gen. xxxvi. 31: 
* And these are the kings which have reigned in ADVM,f 


* This brings in the subject of the worlds of unbalanced force which are 
said by the Zohar to have been created and destroyed prior to the creation 
of the present world. ‘These worlds of unbalanced force are typified by the 
Edomite kings. (See Introduction.) 

+ As the Sephiroth proceed each from the preceding one in the series, it 
is evident that before the counterbalarcing Sephira is formed, the force in the 
preceding Sephira is unbalanced; e.g., the fourth Sephira is Gedulah or 
Chesed, Mercy; and the fifth Sephira is Geburah or Pachad, Sternness ; 
therefore, till Geburah appears, Gedulah is unbalanced, and this condition is 
the reign of one of the Edomite kings ; but when Geburah appears his reign 
is over. 

t ADVM =1+4+6+40 = 51 = NA = Failure. AN = also 51, and 
means pain. Ergo, also unbalanced force is the source alike of failure and 
of pain. 


Wee ον. ος ASSEMBLY. 175 


Edom.” In the land of Edom; that is, in the place 
wherein al] judgments exist. 

515. But all these subsisted not until the White 
Head * of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones was disposed 
(in its ordination). 

516. When this was conformed, He disposed all the 
inferior conformations, and all the superior and inferior 
forms were thus arranged, 

517. Thence we learn that unless the head (07 ruling 
power, or government) of a nation, whatever form of 
government it may happen to be, be first properly con- 
stituted, that nation cannot be properly ruled. For if 
the head be first disposed aright, then all things can be 
ordained, but if that be not first disposed aright, neither 
can the nation be governed aright. 

518. The ordering of ali things is from the Ancient 
of Days. For before that He was disposed in His con- 
formation, nothing could be ordained, because as yet it 
was first necessary that Himselff should be ordained; 
and all the worlds were desolate. 

519. Which these words intimate, ibid. 32: “ And 
there reigned in Edom Bela, the son of Beor." 

520. ** And there reigned in Edom.” Here is a certain 
venerable Arcanum hidden ; for herein is that place inti- 
mated wherein all the judgments are collected together, 
and whence they depend. 

521. * Bela, the son of Beor." This is the tradition. 
This denoteth the most rigorous judicial decree, for whose 
cause there are collected together a thousand times a thou- 
sand authors of mourning and woe. 

522. * And the name of his city is Dinhabah." What 
is DNHBH, Dinhabah? As if it were to be said, ‘‘ Give 
forth judgment.” Like as it is written, Prov. xxx. 15: 
** The horse-leech hath two daughters, crying, ‘Give, give.’ " 


* This is another title of the Crown, Kether, the first Sephira. (See 
Introduction. ) 
+ Because He is the Absolute One, the Eheieh Asher Eheieh. 


176 KABBALAH. 


523. But when he ascendeth, so that he may be con- 
formed therein, he cannot subsist and he cannot consist. 
Wherefore? Because the form of the man is not as yet 
constituted. 

524. What is the reason of this? Because the consti- 
tution of man containeth all things under this form, and 
in that form are all things disposed. 

525. And because that constitution of Adam was not 
as yet found, they (the Edomite kings) could not subsist, 
nor be conformed, and they were destroyed. 

526. Have they then been abolished, and are all these 
included in (the supernal) man? For truly they were 
abolished that they might be withdrawn from form, until 
there should come forth the representation of Adam. 

527. But when that form is configurated, they all 
exist, and have been restored in another condition. 

528. Some among them are mitigated, and (some) are 
not mitigated ; but evidently there are certain of them 
which have not been mitigated. 

529. And if thou shalt say: ‘‘ Also it is written, 
‘and he died,’ surely that denoteth that they were 
altogether abolished.” I answer that it is not so; but 
whosoever descendeth from his former position wherein 
he was before, concerning such an one is it said in Scrip- 
ture that he died. 

530. Like as it is written, Exod. ii. 23: “ And the 
king of Egypt died.” Because he descended from the 
former condition wherein he was. 

531. But after that Adam was constituted they 
are called by other names, and are mitigated in a per- 
manent condition through him; and they exist in their 
place, and are all called by other names and not by their 
former (appellations). 

532. Excepting that one* concerning whom it is 
written, Gen. xxxvi. 39: “And the name of his wife 


* Hadar, HDR. 


DIE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 377 


was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of 
Mezahab. 

533. For what reason? Because they were not 
abolished like the others. Wherefore? Because they 
were male and female, like as the palm-tree, which groweth 
not unless there be both male and female. 

534. And because now they are found male and 
female, and it is not written concerning them that they 
died like as the others, but remained in a fixed con- 
dition. 

535. But they were not (definitely composed) until the 
form of the man was composed (that is, the supernal man). 
But after that the form of the supernal Adam was con- 
stituted, they were restored in another condition, and came 
in proper order. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


CONCERNING THE SKULL OF MICROPROSOPUS AND ITS APPUR- 
TENANCES ; NAMELY, CONCERNING THE SUBTLE AIR, AND 
THE FIRE, AND THE DEW. 


536. THIs is the tradition. When the White Head * 
propounded unto Himself to superadd ornament unto His 
own adornment, He constituted, prepared, and produced 
one single spark from His intense splendour of light. 
He fanned it and condensed it (or conformed 1t). 

537. And He developed His thought, and extended it 
in three hundred and seventy directions. 

538. And the spark subsisted, and waited until the 
pure air went forth which involved it around; and an 
ultimate extension having been made, He produced a 
certain hard skull (bounded) on four sides.f 

* Another title for the crown, Kether. (See Introduction.) 
t By the letters of the Tetragram. 
N 


178 KABBALAH. 


539. Andin that pure subtle air was the spark absorbed 
and comprehended and included therein. 

540. Dost thou not think therein? Truly it is hidden 
therein. 

541. And therefore is that skull expanded in its sides ; 
and that air is the most concealed attribute of the Ancient 
of Days. 

542. In the spirit which is hidden in that skull there 
are expanded fire on the one side and air on the other. 
And the subtle air is whirled about it from this side, 
and the subtle fire is whirled about it from that side. 

543. What is the fire in this place? But verily it is 
not fire, but that splendour which is included in the 
subtle air, and it shineth in two hundred and seventy 
worlds. 

544. And rigour or judgment is found therefrom ; and 
therefore it is called the hard skull. 

545. Within that skull are nine thousand myriads of 
worlds, which receive the influx from it, and are at peace 
above it. 

546. In that skull distilleth the dew* from the White 
Head, which is ever filled therewith; and from that dew 
are the dead raised unto life. 

547. And that dew hath in itself two colours. From 
the White Head there is a whiteness in it, which entirely 
comprehendeth all whiteness. 

548. But whensoever it remaineth in that head of 
Microprosopus, there appeareth in it a redness, like as in 
crystal, which is white, and there appeareth a red colour 
in the white colour. 

549. And therefore is it written, Dan. xii. 2: ** And 
many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and 
everlasting contempt." 

κ This subtle air, fire, and dew are analogous to the three ' mother 


letters "of the “ Sepher Yetzirah," A, M, and Su; the letter A symbolizing 
air, the medium between M the water, and Su the fire. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 179 


550. “To everlasting life.” Because they are worthy 
of that whiteness which cometh from Macroprosopus, even 
from the Ancient of Days. 

551. “To shame and everlasting contempt.” Because 
they are worthy of that redness of Microprosopus. 

552. And all things are contained in that dew, as is 
intimated in these words, Isa. xxvi. 19: ‘‘ Because the 
dew of lights is thy dew”—where there is a duality of 
expression. 

553. And that dew, which distilleth, distilleth daily 
upon the field of apples, in colour white and red. 

554. This skull shineth in two colours toward this side 
and toward that. 

555. And from that subtle air, from the skull, there 
are expanded in His countenance one hundred and fifty 
myriads of worlds; and therefore is He called Zauir 
Aphin (or Anpin), Microprosopus, the Lesser Counte- 
nance. 

556. But in that time, when there is need, is His 
countenance expanded and made vast, because He looketh 
back upon the countenance of the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones, from Whom is the life of the universe. 

557. And from that skull there is a place of exit in 
one place unto those which are below; and they reflect 
His light towards the Ancient of Days, when they ascend 
in numeration beneath the wand.* 

558. Therefore is His skull cleft beneath, when (the 
inferiors) ascend in numeration, and from this cleavage a 
reflection of light ariseth toward the Ancient of Days. 


* This statement will be utterly unintelligible to the ordinary reader, 
unless he is told that there are four secret qabalistical symbols attached to 
the four letters of Tetragrammaton—viz., the wand to I, the cup of libation 
to H, the sword to V, and the shekel of gold to H final. The wand in the 
text refere to the I, Fod, of the Ancient One, hidden and concealed in the 
I of IHVH, and at the head of the Sephiroth. 


180 KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


CONCERNING THE BRAIN AND MEMBRANE OF THE BRAIN 
OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


559. Ix the cavities of the skull three hollow places 
are found, wherein 1s located the brain. 

560. And a thin membrane is placed therein, but not 
a thick membrane, hidden also as that of the Ancient of 
Days. 

561. And therefore is this brain expanded, and it 
shineth (or proceedeth) in thirty-two* paths. The same 
is that which is written, Gen. ii. 7: * And a river went 
forth out of Eden." 

562. Also we have learned that in the three holiow 
places of the skull the brain is contained. 

563. Out of the first cavity proceedeth a certain 
fountain of the brain in four directions, and it goeth 
forth from the skull, in whose cavity are contained those 
thirty-two paths which are the spirits of wisdom. 

564. Out of the second cavity there goeth forth and 
expandeth a second certain fountain, and the fifty gates 
(of the Understanding) are opened. 

565. In those fifty gates are contained the fifty days 
of the law; the fifty years of the jubilee; and the fifty 
thousand generations wherein the most boly God— blessed 
be He !—intendeth to restore and commemorate His Spirit 
in them. 

566. From the third cavity there go forth a thousand 
times a thousand conclaves and assemblies, wherein 
DOTu,t Daath, Knowledge, is contained and dwelleth. 


* These are the thirty-two pathsofthe “ Sepher Yetzirah, " symbolized by the 
ten numbers of the decad, and the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. 

+ It is to be remembered that, according to the “Book of Concealed 
Mystery," Daath is the conjunction of the second and third Sephiroth, 
Wisdom and Understanding, the I and H of IHVH, the Supernal Father and 
Mother. 


ΕΠ OLY ASSEMBLY. 181 


567. And the hollow place of this cavity is placed 
between the other two cavities ;* and all those conclaves 
are filled from either side. 

568. This is that which is written, Prov. ii, 4: ‘‘ And 
in knowledge shall the conclaves be filled.” 

569. And those three are expanded over the whole 
body, on this side and on that, and with them doth the 
whole body cohere, and the body is contained by them 
on every side, and through the whole body are they ex- 
panded and diffused. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
CONCERNING THE HAIR OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


"^ 570. WE have learned that from the skull of His head 
(1.¢., of Microprosopus) hang one thousand times a thousand 
myriad myriads of locks of black hair, and they are 
intertwined together each to the other, and they are 
mingled together. 

571. But there is no classification made of the locks of 
hair separately, because pure and impure alike adhere to 
each other therein, and here (the description above given) 
mentions both pure and impure together. 

572. In all those sides which are pure, and in all those 
which are impure, there are intricate and dense locks of 
hair, some of which are soft, some hard. 

573. And in single locks doth the hair hang down, 
curls upon curls, which emit flames, and hang down in 
beautiful and strong array, like those of a brave hero 
victorious in war. 

574. They are excellent as the great and foliated 
cedars. This is that which is written, Cant. v. 15: 
“ Excellent as the cedars.” 


* As the mediating path between them. 


182 KABBALAH. 


575. The curling locks are parted on this side and on 
that above the head. 

576. Also we have learned that they remain in curls 
because they proceed from many fountains of the three 
canals of the brain. 

577. For from the fountain of one cavity of the skull 
proceedeth the hair, and it becomes curls upon curls 
(formed), from the fountains proceeding from that cavity. 

578. From the second cavity there go forth fifty 
fountains, and from those fountains the hair issueth, 
and it becometh curls upon curls, and they are mingled 
with the other locks. 

579. From the third cavity there go forth a thousand 
times a thousand conclaves and assemblies, and from them 
all the hair issueth ; and it becometh curls upon curls, 
and they are mingled with the other locks. 

580. And therefore are those locks so curling, and all 
the progeny of them is produced from the three cavities 
of the brain of the skull. 

581. And all those curls hang down and are spread 
over the sides of the ears. 

582. And therefore is it written, Dan. ix. 18: “ In- 
cline thine ear, O my God, and hear." 

583. And in those curls there are found alike right 
and left,* light and dark, mercy and judgment, and every- 
thing (that hath in itself the qualities of) right and left 
dependeth thence (from Aficroprosopus), and not from the 
Ancient One. 

584. In the parting of the hair appeareth a certain 
slender path, which hath a certain connection with that 
path of the Ancient of Days, and from that path are 
divided six hundred and thirteen paths,] which are 

* Whereas Macroprosopus is symbolized only by the right side of the 
profile. 

T Forthe reason I have given in the preceding note. 

t The precepts of the law are said to be 613 in number, which is also 


expressed by Gematria in the words “ Moses our Rabbi"; MSaH RBINV 
Mosheh Rabbino = 40-- 300+5+200+2+10+50+6 = 613. 


3 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 183 


distributed among the paths of the precepts of the 
law. 

585. Like as it is written, Ps. xxv. 6: * All the paths 
of Tetragrammaton are mercy and truth unto such as keep 
His covenant and His testimony." 

586. We have learned that in the single locks a 
thousand times a thousand utterances of the speech of 
Tetragrammaton are found, which depend from the single 
locks. 

587. Among them some are hard (rigorous) and some 
soft (merciful), as (belonging unto) the Lord of the 
equilibrium (or, the Lord of mercy, who is an equilibrium 
between these); and therefore is He (Microprosopus) said 
to include right and left. 


CHAPTER XXX, 
CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


588. THE forehead of the skull is the inspection of 
inspection, and it is not uncovered, except in that time 
when it is necessary to visit sinners for the purpose of 
examining their deeds. 

589. Also we have learned that when that forehead is 
uncovered, all the lords of judgment are stirred up, and 
the whole universe is brought under judgment. 

590. Save in that time when the prayers of the 
Israelites ascend before the Ancient of Days, and entreat 
mercy for His children ; then is uncovered the forehead 
of the benevolence of benevolences,* and it shineth down 
upon this (forehead) of Microprosopus, and judgment is 
quieted. 

591. Over this forehead there goeth forth a certain 


* Namely, that of Macroprosopus. 


184 KABBALAH. 


portion of hair, which is extended over it from the brain, 
which produceth the fifty gates (of Understanding). 

592. And when it is expanded, that brow glows with 
anger; itis the inspector of the sinners of the world— 
namely, of those who are shameless in their deeds. 

593. Like as it is written, Jer. iii. 3: “ And thou 
hadst the forehead of a woman who is a whore, thou re- 
fusedst to be ashamed.” 

594. And we have learned that that hair subsisteth 
not in that part of the forehead; so that it may be 
uncovered against those who remain steadfast in their 
iniquities. 

595. And when the Holy One—blessed be He !—is 
awakened, that He may be pleased with the just, the 
Countenance of the Ancient of Days shineth upon the 
Countenance of Microprosopus, and His forehead (that of 
Macroprosopus) is uncovered, and illuminateth that fore- 
head (that of Macroprosopus), and then is ealled the time 
of benevolence. l 

596. But as often as judgment threateneth, and that 
forehead: of Microprosopus is uncovered, there is un- 
covered the forehead of the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, 
and judgment is mitigated and is not exercised. 

597. We have learned that that forehead is expanded 
into two hundred thousand rednesses of rednesses, which 
are contained therein, and are included therein. 

598. And when the forehead of Microprosopus is un- 
covered, licence is given unto all those to destroy. But 
when the forehead of the benevolence of benevolence, is 
uncovered, so that it may shine upon that forehead (of 
Microprosopus) and upon all those (rednesses), then are 
they quieted. 

599. Also we have learned by tradition : Twenty-four 
superior judgments are found, and they are all called 
ΝΤΖΟΗΙΜ, Netzachim, or Victories; howsoever, while (in 
the arrangement of letters, NT zCuIM, the singular) NTzCu, 
Netzach, is called Victory (i.e., means that), the neighbour- 


eee Ce ATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 185 


ing letters* (M and N in NTzCuIM) being permuted, 
(we obtain MTZCuIN singular), MTzCu, Metzach (mean- 
ing) forehead. 

600. Therefore (the same word signifieth) forehead and 
Victory, which is in the plural victories. And this is that 
which is given by tradition: The Victory of victories. 
And they are in the forehead, but certain among them 
are extended in the body in (certain) known parts. 

601. This is the exotic tradition: What is that which 
is written, 1 Sam, xv. 29: * Also the Netzach of Israel 
doth not lie nor repent, for He is not man that He should 
repent,” 

602. Now have we declared that Arcanum according 
to its constitution. All that Victory which is expanded 
in the body, at that time when the world is to be judged 
and converted, admitteth repentance, neither executeth 
judgment if they be converted. 

603. For what reason? Because the matter resteth 
in that place which is called Adam, and He may repent. 

604. But if that Victory be seen and uncovered in 
that part of the head just spoken of— namely, the 
forehead—there is neither time nor opportunity for 
repentance. 

605. Wherefore? Because it is not that place which 
is called Adam, for the countenance and the nose are not ` 
uncovered, but the forehead alone. 

606. And in that part—(i.e., the forehead) the whole 
countenance is not found, for that (forehead) is not called 
Adam, and therefore is it said: “ He is not a man that 
He may repent” (1.¢., He, Hoa VA, H, is not Adam, &c.). 
So also is it as regardeth the ( proportion of ) Victory in the 
other parts of the body (of Microprosopus), 


* T.e. in their usual place in the order of the alphabet. 


186 KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER XXXL 


CONCERNING THE EYES OF MICROPROSOPUS, 


607. ΤΠΕ eyes of the head (of Microprosopus) are diverse 
from all other eyes. ‘There is a shadowy darkness cast 
by the eyebrows which is (as if it were) painted above 
the eyes, whence all eyes are overshadowed with a dark 
shade. 

608. Curling hairs hang down from the curls of the 
hair which is above them, and mark the form of the 
eyebrows above the eyes, at the commencement of the 
forehead. 

609. And in both (the eyebrows) are contained seven 
hundred times a thousand lords of inspection who reside 
above the eyelids, 

610. In the eyelids radiate one thousand four hun- 
dred myriads (of hairs), which adhere to the edges and 
form the eyelashes ; and far above these is the inspection 
of the eye of the Ancient of Days.* 

611. And as often as those eyelids (of Microprosopus) 
are raised, the same eye (i.¢., that of Macroprosopus) 
appeareth, just as when the eyes of any man are opened 
when he awaketh from sleep. 

612. And (the eyes of Microprosopus) behold the open 
eye (of Maeroprosopus shining down upon them), and they 
are rendered brilliant with a certain brilliant whiteness of 
the good eye (4.e., that of Macroprosopus, because in Him 
“all ds right " —i.e., good—and there is no left). 

613. Like as it is written, Cant. v. 12: '' Washed with 
milk.” What is “with milk?” With this excellent 
primal whiteness. | 


* True to all the previous symbolism, the eye of the Ancient of Days, 
Macroprosopus, is here spoken of, instead of eyesin the plural number, seeing 
that, as I have before remarked, he is rather to be symbolized by a profile 
than by a full face. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 197 


614. And in that time is there found with Him (2.6. 
Microprosopus) an intuition of mercy, and therefore the 
prayer of the Israelites ascendeth, because His eyes are 
opened (i.e. those of Microprosopus), and are whitened 
with that whiteness (of the eye of Macroprosopus). 

615. Like as it is written, Ps. xliv. 23: “ Awake; 
why sleepest Thou, O Tetragrammaton? Arise.” 

616. And truly as often as His eyes are not open, all 
the lords of judgments subdue the Israelites, and the 
other nations have dominion over them. 

617. But whensoever He openeth His eyes, these are 
illuminated from the good eye (of Macroprosopus), and 
mercy is over Israel; and His eye turneth around and 
executeth vengeance upon the other nations. 

618. This is that same which is written, Ps. xxxv. 
23: “ Awake, and arise.” “ Awake!” and (Thine eye) 
shall be illuminated with that whiteness. “ Arise!” so 
that it may exercise judgment upon those who have 
overcome them. 

619. When His eyes are opened they appear beautiful 
as those of doves; in colour, white, red, and black, and 
golden yellow. 

620. And this eye (otherwise, this whiteness) is not 
uncovered except when it is looked upon by the good 
eye, and then all those colours are covered (otherwise, 
bathed) with this whiteness of the rays. 

621. From those colours, when they are uncovered, go 
forth seven eyes of Providence, which issue from the 
black of the eye. 

622. This is that which is said, Zach. in. ο: “ Upon 
one stone seven eyes.” 

623. What is the “one stone?” The black of the eye. 

624. From the red go forth seven emissaries, who 
deflect towards the left side, and they flame with fire, 
which is toward the north side, and they are combined, 
so that they may be expanded into the world for the 
purpose of uncovering the ways of sinners. 


188 KABBALAH. 


625. This is that which is written, Zach. im on 
“ Those seven are the eyes of Tetragrammaton going 
forth throughout the whole earth.” 

626. From the yellow go forth seven pure splendours 
(otherwise lights), which are turned towards the south 
side, and they are combined so that they may be ex- 
tended into the world, towards those ways which are 
necessary to be uncovered (otherwise towards those 
deeds, &c.). 

627. Like as it is written, Job xxxiv. 21: “ Because 
His eyes are upon the ways of man" And when they 
are illuminated with that whiteness, then they behold all 
the lords of truth, in order to do good unto the world 
because of them; and every glance (of those eyes) is bene- 
volent towards Israel. 

628. But with the red colour He beholdeth those who 
are bound; which is intimated in these words, Exod. 
11, 7: “In seeing have I seen;” “In seeing,” for the 
purpose of doing good unto them; “I have seen,” that 
by vindicating them I may deliver them from their 
afflictors. 

629. And therefore is it written, Ps. xliv. 24: 
“ Awake: wherefore sleepest Thou, O "l'etragrammaton ? 
Arise! forsake us not for ever" ‘ Awake and arise.” 
There are two inspections, two openings, two good things ; 
there is mercy, there is also vengeance. 

630. The first colour is red, hidden and inclosed 
within red ; in comparison with it, all other reds do not 
seem to be (red).* 

631. Around this red goeth a certain black thread (of 
colour), and surroundeth it. 

632. This second colour is black, like that stone 
which goeth forth from the abyss once in a thousand 
years into the great sea. 


* Meaning that it is so brilliant that all other red colours seem poor and 
pale in comparison with it. 


ΘΕ ΕΤΕΚ HOLY ASSEMBLY. 189 


633. And when that stone* goeth forth there cometh 
a tempest and a storm upon the great sea,t and its 
waters are troubled, and (their motion soundeth as) a 
voice, and they are heard by the great fish which is 
called Leviathan. 

634. And this stone goeth forth, and is whirled on- 
ward in the current of the sea, and goeth forth thence ; 
and this is so great a blackness} that beside it all other 
blacknesses are as nought (otherwise, now it is with- 
drawn because all the other paths are hidden and 
enshrouded by it). 

635. And such is the blackness of the black (part of) 
the eye, which includeth and concealeth all the remain- 
ing blacknesses; and about that blackness there is found 
a certain red thread (of colour) which surroundeth that 
blackness. 

636. The third colour is the yellow of all yellows, 
which includeth and concealeth all other vellows, and in 
the circumference of that yellow there whirl around two 
threads (of colour), a red thread on the one direction, and 
a black thread in another direction; and they surround 
that yellow colour. 

637. But when that white brilliance whirleth around 
it, and the eye flameth with that white brilliance, all 
those other colours are not at rest, and are submerged in 
the lowest depths thereof; the red, the yellow, and the 
black are not seen only that white brilliance alone ; which 
receiveth its light from Him, even from the Ancient 
of Days. 

638. And from that (white brilliance) all the inferiors 
shine, neither is any colour seen save that white bril- 
liance alone. And therefore are all the lords of red- 


* Cf. Rev. vii. 8. This also suggests alchemical symbolism. 

+ The great sea is Binah, and the great fish is Leviathan, “ whose head is 
broken by the waters of the great sea." (See the Introduction, “Book of 
Concealed Mystery,” i. $ 28; Ps. lxxiv. 13 ; and Rev. xiii.) 

t Cf. the ‘‘ blackest of the black ” of Hermes Trismegistus. 


190 KABBALAH. 


ness and blackness, which are as it were twin (colours), 
displaced. 

639. This is the same which is written, Cant. iv. 2: 
* Which go up from the washing, which are all twins." 

640. What is this, ‘“ From the washing?” From 
that white brilliance of the excellent holy eye; for all 
are twins, the one (colowr) is as the other.* 

641. But truly doth not he (the author of the Can- 
ticles) say that the teeth are each in turn like a shorn 
flock ; and thou sayest that all these are twins ? 

642. Nevertheless, the sense is that this whiteness of 
them is as that whiteness of the eyes (of Microprosopus) 
when they are made brilliant by the white brilliance of 
the supernal eye (of Macroprosopus). 

643. And the just are about to understand and be- 
hold that thing in the Spirit of Wisdom. 

644. Like as it is written, Isa. lii. 8: “ Because they 
shall see eye to eye." When? " When Tetragrammaton 
shall bring again Zion." 

645. Also it is written, Num. xiv. I4: “By whom 
Thou, O Tetragrammaton ! art seen eye to eye:” f and 
then the opening of the eyes is towards good. 

646. For there is an opening of the eyes toward good. 
and there 1s also another (opening of the eyes) toward evil. 

647. Toward good, like as it is written, Dan. ix. 18: 
* Open Thine eyes and behold our desolations, and the 
city over which Thy name hath been pronounced. Here 
it is toward good. 

648. But toward evil, likeas it is written, Isa, xxxiil. 
20: “ Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, 
a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of 
the stakes thereof shall ever be removed." Here truly 
it is toward good and toward evil, because the one 
existeth not without the other. 

* le. the black and the red, which are here represented as simultaneously 
involving each other. 


t In our version it is translated “face to face," and not ‘‘eye to eye”; 
but in the original Hebrew itis OIN BOIN, Ayin Be-Ayin, "' eye to eye." 


ο ου. EATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. I9I 


649. We have learned it in the * Book of Concealed 
Mystery.” What is this? “Thine eyes shall see Jeru- 
salem a quiet habitation.” Is not Jerusalem therefore a 
quiet habitation ? Also it 1s written, Isa. 1. 21 : “ Justice 
dwelt therein.” But in the place wherein justice is 
found there is not rest, neither is it at peace (otherwise : 
In the place wherein judgment dwelleth and is found, 
this justice is not rest, &c.). 

650. For verily this is the true interpretation: 
“ Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation " (is 
thus to be explained). The habitation is said to be quiet, 
in respect of the Ancient of Days, who looketh upon those 
eyes (of AMieroprosopus). 

651. For truly His eye is quiet and tranquil; the eye 
of mercy, the eye which altereth not from this aspect 
unto any other aspect. 

652. And therefore is it written OIN K* (instead of 
OINIK) “They shall behold Thine eye : " not Thine eyes, 
(seeing OINK is written) without the second I, Yod. 

653. But how cometh it that it is said Jerusalem, 
and not Zion? It is properly thus said for the purpose 
of subjugating judgment which was found therein, and 
for exciting mercy upon it. 

654. Also have we learned this. It is written, Deut. 
xi. I2 : * The eyes of Tetragrammaton thy God are upon 
it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of 
the year.” This is that which is written: ‘“ Justice 
dwelt therein ; " because therein are found many most 
severe judgments, as in all other instances. 

655. But in the time to come there shall be found 
therein one eye of mercy (namely), the eye of the 
Ancient of Days. 

656. This is that which is intimated, Isa. liv. 7: 
* But with great mercies will I gather thee." 

657. Where, because it is said '' with mercies,” what 


* OINK signifies '* thine eye,” in the singular. 


192 KABDALAA. 


is (the meaning of the adjective) “ great” (used herewit 
Assuredly because mercy is duplicated, (namely) the 
mercy of the Ancient of Days (Alacroprosopus), which is 
called ‘‘ great mercies.” 

658. And the mercy of Microprosopus, which is called 
mercies plain and unqualified, seeing that in Him there 
are right and left,* (symbolizing the balance of) Justice 
and Mercy. And therefore is it said: * And in great 
mercies will I gather thee;” those, namely, of the 
Ancient of Days. 

659. This have we learned. In those eyes (of Micro- 
prosopus), and in the two colours of them— namely, in the 
red and in the black—there are said to abide two tears ; 
and when He, even the Holy of the Holy Ones, desireth 
to have mercy upon the Israelites, then He sendeth down 
those two tears so that they may grow sweet in the 
(waters of the) great sea. 

660. The great sea, which is that of excellent wisdom, 
so that in that stream (otherwise, white brilliance) and 
in that fountain they may be cleansed; and they go 
forth from the great sea, and there is mercy upon the 
Israelites. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
CONCERNING THE NOSE OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


661. WE have learned it in the * Book of Concealed 
Mystery.” The nose of Microprosopus. From the nose 
is the countenance known. In this nose is diverse 
symbolism. 

662. For it is written, Ps. xviii. 8: “ There went up 


* Right and left exist in Microprosopus, while in Macroprosopus all is 
right. The latter is rather to be symbolizel by a profile, as I have before 
remarked, than by a full face, as in the case of the former. 


ΠΠ 


EeGREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 193 


a smoke out of His nose,* and fire out of His mouth 
devoured; coals were kindled by it." 

663. “ There went up a smoke out of His nose." In 
this smoke are included both the fire and the burning 
coals; for there is no smoke without fire, neither fire 
without smoke. Truly allthings result (Aerefrom : other- 
wise, are kindled Aerein) and go forth from His nose. 

664. Also we have learned that when these three 
things are associated together which are included in 
that smoke which issueth from the nose, the nosef is 
lengthened. 

665. And therein are two colours, for the smoke 
bloweth and rusheth forth black and red; and they call 
it ΑΡ} Aph, wrath; and CHIMH, Chimah, fervour; 
and MSnuHOHITH, Meshachith, perdition. 

666. And if thou sayest wrath and fervour, it is well, 
since it is written, Deut. ix. 19: “Since I have feared 
because of wrath and fervour." For these are the black 
and red smoke. But whence is added ΜΡΗΟΗΙΤΗ, 
Meshachith, perdition ? 

667. Because it is written, Gen. xii. 10: “ Before 
that 'letragrammaton destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha." 
But the word SnHCOHTH, Shachith, denoted perdition 
brought about by burning, kindled fire. 

668. Also we have learned that there are five$ 
GBVRAN, Geboran, severities in this conformation of 
Microprosopus, and they ascend in one thousand and four 
hundred severities, GBVRAN ; and they are extended 


* The ordinary English version renders it ‘‘nostrils” and not ‘ nose," 
but in the Hebrew the word is singular. 

1 Isa. xlviii. 9 is translated in the ordinary English version: ‘‘ For my 
name’s sake will I defer mine anger ;’’ but Parkhurst in his Hebrew and 
Chaldee Lexicon, art. CHTM, says the correct rendering is “for my name's 
sake will I lengthen my nose." Knorr de Rosenroth, in his Latin version of 
8 664, renders it by “ corrugatur," which is hardly correct. 

+ The word AP, Aph, stands alike for the words “nose ” and “ anger.” 

§ If we carefully examine this obscure passage, 1 think we shall find that 
the number five is the key to unlock its symbolism ; for five is the fifth 
Sephira, Geburah, GBVRH, Strength or Severity, which operates through 


Oo 


194 KABBALAH. 


in His nose, and in His mouth, and in His arms, and in 
His hands, and in His fingers. 

669. And therefore is it written, Ps. evi. 2: “ Who 
can declare the GBVRVTH, Geburoth, powers of Tetra- 
erammaton ?” 

670. Hence it is written, “ powers,” Geburoth (in the 
plural number); and it is written, 1 Chron. xxix. 11: 
“Thine ! O Tetragrammaton, are Gedulah and Geburah,” * 
in the singular (number). 

671. Assuredly thus have we learned. When all 
those severities are amalgamated into one, then are they 
called one Geburah, GBVRH. 

672. And all those powers, Geboran, commence to 
descend from the nose. And from it depend a thousand 
times a thousand and four hundred myriads in their 
single (forms).T 

673. And from that smoke which issueth from his 
nose depend a thousand times a thousand myriads, and 
four hundred and five which belong to this (idea of) 
Severity.I For all the severities depend from this nose. 

674. For it is written, Ps. οχ]σ. 4. “ From gene- 
ration unto generation shall they praise thy works, and 
announce thy GBVRV'Tn, Geburoth.” 

675. And when that GDVRH, Geburah, Strength, 
commenceth (£o be manifested), all the severities radiate 
thence, and are sharpened, until they descend in the form 
of a swift-whirling fire-flaming sword (Gen. iii. 24.) 


Judgment, and ultimately through the numbers and intelligences of the 
planet Mars. Now, the 1,400 severities are the fivefold form of RP, Raph, 
which = the idea of terror, and RP = 280, which x 5 = 1,400. And the 
least number of 1,400 18 1+ 4+0+0 = 5. Also 1,400 = ATH = chaos, or 
substance of anything. Finally, these are extended into five parts of Macro- 
prosopus—viz., nosc, mouth, arms, hands, fingers. And the number 5 = H. 

* See Introduction. GBVR (the root being GBR) = 211 = IAR, a 
flood. This is of course by Gematria. 

+ This formidable sounding arrangement is only our previous 1,400, con- 
sidered on another plane of operation, in the material world. 

t This is 1,400 again in its most material forms in Asiah; the number five 
at the end is simply the number of the Sephira of Severity added to the other. 


ου, HOLY ASSEMBLY. 195 


676. It is written, Gen. xix. 13: “For we will 
destroy this place.” Also it is written, Gen. xiii. τος 
* Before that Tetragrammaton destroyed Sodom and 
Gomorrha.” And again, Gen. xix. 24: “ Tetragramma- 
ton rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha.” 

677. Assuredly thus have we learned: There is no 
judge over the wicked, but they themselves convert the 
measure of Mercy into a measure of Judgment. 

678. But how do they convert it thus? Also it is 
written, Mal. iii. 6: “I, Tetragrammaton, change not." 

679. Assuredly as many times as the Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones and that White Head uncovereth the 
benevolence of benevolences, great mercies are found 
everywhere. 

680. But when that is not uncovered, all the judg- 
ments of Microprosopus are prepared ; and in this manner, 
if it be permitted us to say so, Mercy becometh Judgment ; 
that is, the most Ancient One of all. 

681. We have learned in Barietha*: * When the 
Ancient of the Ancient Ones uncovereth the benevolence 
of benevolences, all those lights which are called by a 
similar name shine, and Mercy is found in all things. 

682. But when that Concealed One of the Concealed 
Ones is not uncovered, and those lights shine not, judg- 
ments are stirred up, and Judgment is exercised. 

683. Who therefore is the cause of that Judgment ? 
The benevolence of the benevolences, because it is not 
uncovered, and therefore do sinners change Mercy into 
Judgment (as regardeth themselves). 

684. But because this is said, Gen. xix. 24: “ From 
Tetragrammaton out of heaven," it is said concerning 
Zaur Anpin, Microprosopus. 

685. And whence is this obtained? Because it 
is written (in the preceding passage): MN HSHMIM, 
Men Ha-Shamayim, out of heaven. (But the word 


* See ante, § 388 of this book. 


196 KABBALAH. 


HSaMIM, Ha-Shamayim, is equivalent to) ASH VMIM,* 
Ash Ve-Mim, fire and water, Mercy and Judgment, in the 
antithesis of that (condition) wherein no Judgment is 
found at all. 

686. We have learned that this nose (of Microprosopus) 
is short,t and when the smoke commenceth to issue 
therefrom, it departeth thence swiftly, and Judgment is 
exercised, 

687. But what hindereth that nose that it may not 
produce smoke? The nose of the Ancient and Holy 
One; for He is also called before all others ARK APIM, 
Arikh Aphim, Long of Nose. 

688. And this is the Arcanum which we have learned : 
Between the two words, IHVH, IHVH, Tetragrammaton, 
Tetragrammaton, an accent is interpolated t (whensoever 
these two are found in juxtaposition in Scripture). 

689. For wheresoever any name is repeated twice 
over, a distinction is made (between them), as when it is 
said, Gen, xxii 11, “Abraham, Abraham;” also, Gen. 
xlvi. 2, * Jacob, Jacob ;” also, 1 Sam. iii. 10, * Samuel, 
Samuel ;” where, by the Psig accent, these pairs of names 
are distinguished ; excepting that place, Exod. iii. 4, 
* Moses, Moses,” where no accent interveneth. 

690. For what reason? “ Abraham, Abraham,” Gen. 
xxii. II (herein therefore is an aecent introduced because 


* In the “ Sepher Yetzirah," to which work I have already had occasion to 
refer more than once, the letter Su is said to symbolize fire, and therefore 
SHMIM may be said to be fire and water. 

+ In contradistinction to that of Macroprosopus, who is called also Ankh 
Aphim, Long of Nose, as well as Arikh Anpin, Vast of Countenance. 

t This accent is called P5iq, and in the grammar of Gesenius is classed as 
the twentieth accent, or the fifth of the third series known as the ‘‘lesser 
distinctives." It is represented by a vertical line placed between the two 
words to which it applies. An example of its use is to be found in Exod. 
xxxiv. 6: “ Tetragrammaton, Tetragrammaton (between these two words a 
Psiq accent is introduced), merciful and gracious, longsuffering and abundant 
in goodness and truth." It is worthy of note that the word here translated 
‘long-suffering ” is ARK APIM, Arikh Aphim, Long of Nose. 


Gime GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 197 


that) the latter (of these two names) denoteth that which 
is perfect, but the former that which is not as yet perfect ; 
for at this time he is perfected with ten temptations, 
and therefore is the (Psiq) accent interpolated, for at this 
time he can hardly be said to be the same man as he 
was before. 

691. (When it is said) * Jacob, Jacob” (Gen. xlvi. 2), 
the latter denoteth that which is perfect, the former that 
which is not as yet perfect; for now the messenger had 
come to him from his son Joseph, and over him was the 
Schechinah at rest. 

692. Also, now at this time was perfected in the 
earth the holy tree, similar unto the Supernal One, in 
having twelve limitations and seventy branches,* which 
were not hitherto completed ; and therefore the latter 
denoteth that which is perfect, and the former that which 
is not as yet perfect; whence the accent falleth between 
them. 

693. In the passage, * Samuel, Samuel” (1 Sam. iii. 
IO), an accent is also interpolated: wherefore? The 
latter name denoteth that which is perfect, the former 
that which is not as yet perfect ; for now he is a prophet, 
whereas before this he was not as yet a prophet. 

694. But when it is said, Exod. 11. 4: “Moses, 
Moses," no accent is interpolated, because he was perfect 
from the very day of his birth, seeing it is written, 
Exod. ii. 2: “ And she saw him, that he was good.” 

695. So also here between these two names of Tetra- 
grammaton, Exod. xxxiv. 6, the Psiq accent is interpo- 
lated ; for the first is indeed a perfect name, but the 
latter is thoroughly and completely perfect. 

696. But Moses speaketh thus in the place of Judg- 
ment, in order that for them he may cause Mercy to 


* That is, the Autz Chaiim, or tree of life, composed of the Sephiroth and 
the Schemhamphorasch, the former being ten and the latter seventy-two. The 
twelve limitations are the twelve sons of Jacob, and the seventy branches the 
total number of the combined families. 


198 KABBALAH. 


descend upon Microprosopus from the Most Holy Ancient 
One. 

697. For thus is the tradition. So great was the 
virtue of Moses that he could make the measures of 
Mercy descend. 

698. And when the Ancient One is uncovered toward 
Microprosopus all things are beheld in the light of 
Mercy, and the nose is appeased, and fire and smoke 
issue not therefrom. 

699. Like as it is written, Isa. xlvii. 9: “ And with 
my praise will I defer mine anger for thee." 

700. Also we have learned: 'lThe nose hath two 
nostrils. From the one issueth a flaming smoke, and it 
entereth into the opening of the Great Abyss. 

701. And from the other nostril issueth a fire which 
is kindled by its flame; and it floweth into four thousand 
worlds, which are upon His left side. 

702. Truly, he who is the cause of war is called the 
fire of Tetragrammaton, the consuming fire, the fire which 
consumeth all other fires. 

703. And that fire is not mitigated save by the fire of 
the altar. 

704. And that smoke which issueth forth from the 
other nostril is not mitigated unless by the smoke of the 
sacrifice of the altar. But αἰ] things depend from the nose. 

705. Therefore is it written, Gen. vill. 12: * And 
Tetragrammaton smelled a sweet savour.” For all these 
are attributed unto the nose, to smell a savour, and to 
emit smoke and fire, and red colour, and therefore is it 
opposed unto the benevolence (namely, the forehead). 

706. And for that cause is it written, Exod. iv. 14: 
* And the anger of Tetragrammaton was kindled.” 
Deut. vii. 4: * And the anger of Tetragrammaton will 
be kindled. Exod. xxi. 24: “ And My wrath is 
kindled. Deut. vi. 15 : “ Lest the wrath of Tetragram- 
maton be kindled.” Which are all to be understood 
concerning Zauir Anpin, or Microprosopus. 


λζΛππ᾿-ι ΞΠΘΕΥ ASSEMBLY. 199 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 
CONCERNING THE EARS OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


707. Tms have we learned. It is written, 2 Kings 
xix. 16: ‘Incline, O God, Thine ear and hear ;" namely, 
that ear which is hidden beneath the hair, and the hair 
hangeth down over it, and yet the ear is there for the 
purpose of hearing. 

708. And from the inner part of the ear, elaborated 
with strongly marked concave formations, like a winding 
spiral Jadder, with incurvation on every side. 

709. But wherefore with curvings? So that He may 
hear both goed and evil. 

710. Also we have learned: From that curving part 
within the earsdepend all those Lordsof Wings concerning 
whom it is written, Eccles. x. 20: “For a bird of the 
air shall carry the voice, and the Lord of the Wings shall 
tell the matter.” 

711. Within that ear, (the Spirit) floweth from the 
three hollow places of the brain into this opening of the 
ears. And from that aflux (the Spirit) the voice de- 
parteth into that profound depth (otherwise, incurvation) 
and is conjoined with (¢he Spirit) in that distillation, as 
well good as evil. 


712. In good; as it is written, Psa. Ixix. 33: ‘ For 
Tetragrammaton heareth the poor. In evil; as it is 
written, Num. xi. 1: ‘‘ And Tetragrammaton heard, and 


His wrath arose, and the fire of Tetragrammaton was 
kindled against them.” 

713. And that ear is closed from without, and a depth 
(otherwise an incurvation) proceedeth within that gallery 
of inspiration from the brain. 

714. So that the voice may be collected together 
within, neither issue forth thence, and that it may be 


200 KABBALAH. 


guarded and shut in on every side; hence it is in the 
nature of an Arcanum," 

715. Woe unto him who discloseth secrets! For he 
who revealeth secrets doth the same thing as if he should 
deny the superior formation, which is so arranged that 
the secrets may be collected together, and that they may 
not issue forth without. 

716. Also we have learned in Bariethat: At that 
time when they call aloud in their troubles, and the hairs 
are moved from before the ears, the voice entereth into 
the ears through that channel, and the spirit of distilla- 
tion from the brain (entereth into that channel likewise). 

717. And in the brain is it collected (otherwise, and 
it slideth on into the brain), and departeth through the 
nostrils of the nose, and is bound, and the nose becometh 
shorter (that of Microprosopus, namely) and gloweth with 
fire, and fire and smoke issue forth; and from those 
nostrils are excited all the severities, and vengeance is 
exercised. 

718. Truly before that from those nostrils the fire 
and smoke issue forth, that voice ascendeth upwards, and 
slideth into the beginning of the brain; and the two 
tears flow down from the eyes. 

719. And by means of that voice the smoke goeth 
forth, and the fire from the brightness which openeth 
those gates; for through that voice which entereth into 
the ears all these things are excited and urged forth 
(otherwise, are mingled together). 

720. And therefore is it written, Num. xi. 1: “ And 
Tetragrammaton heard, and His wrath was kindled, and 
the fire of Tetragrammaton was kindled against them." 
For through that hearing of that voice the whole brain 
is stirred up. 

721. We have learned. It is written, 2 Kings 
xix. 16: ‘Incline, O my God, Thine ear;" like as if it 


* Because in a similar manner a secret is guarded and shut in. 
+ See ante, § 388.  Barietha is “ Traditio extra urbem." 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 201 


should be said, * Let six hundred thousand myriads of 
those wings which depend from those ears be elongated : " 
and they are all called the ears of Tetragrammaton. 

722. When therefore it is said, ‘‘ Incline, O Tetra- 
grammaton, Thine ear,” (this phrase) “ Thine ear," is that 
of Microprosopus. 

723. From one cavity of the brain do those ears 
depend; and from the fifty gates * which proceed from 
that cavity, this is one gate, which extendeth and goeth 
forth and openeth into that channel of the ear. 

724. Like as it is written, Job. xxxiv. 3: “ Because 
the ear trieth words." Also it is written, Ps. vii. Io: 
* And He trieth the heart and reins." l 

725. And in proportion to the expansion of that 
cavity of fifty gates which proceedeth into the body, so 
is the latter expanded even in that place wherein the 
heart resideth. 

726. Therefore concerning the ear it is said that in it 
is made probation; and also concerning the heart it is 
said that in it is made probation; because that they 
proceed (alike) from one place. 

727. We have learned in the * Book of Concealed 
Mystery " that, like as this ear proveth as well the good 
as the evil, so all things which are in Microprosopus 
have part good and part evil, right and left, Mercy and 
Judgment. 

728. And this ear is contiguous unto the brain; and 
because it is contiguous unto the brain, hence that voice 
is directed into a cavity which entereth into the ear. 

729. Therefore concerning the ear it is called hearing ; 
but in this hearing, Binah, the Understanding (the third 
Sephira) is comprehended ; for, also, to hear, is the same 
as to understand, because that thereby all examinations 
are examined together. 

730. And those words of the Lord of Lords are given 


* This refers to the “fifty gates of the Understanding ’—alluding to the 
third Sephira. 


202 KABBALAH. 


forth so that they may be heard, so that they may be 
meditated upon and be understood. 

731. Come, behold! it is written, Hab. ii. 1: 0ο 
Tetragrammaton! I have heard Thy voice, and was afraid.” 

732. This passage hath this meaning: When that 
holy prophet heard and understood and knew, and was 
occupied with those conformations, it is written: “ I was 
afraid.’ Rightly was it (so written) that he should be 
afraid and be broken before Him, for these words are said 
concerning Microprosopus. 

733. When further he understood and knew, what is 
then written? “ O Tetragrammaton! revive Thy work in 
the midst of the years" But concerning the Ancient of 
Days is this said. 

734. And in every passage wherein is fonnd Tetra- 
grammaton, Tetragrammaton, with Yod He twice, or 
with Aleph Daleth and Yod He, the one belongeth 
unto Microprosopus, and the other unto the Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones. Tor because all these things are one 
certain thing, hence by one name are they called. 

735. Also we have learned. When is the full name 
expressed? When it is written, IHVH ALHIM, 
Tetragrammaton Elohim. For that is the full name of 
the Most Ancient of all, and of Microprosopus; and 
when joined together they are called the full name. But 
other forms are not called the full name, like as we have 
established. 

736. When it is said, Gen. ii. 8: “ And Tetragram- 
maton Elohim planted,’ &c. the name is given in 
full, where the discourse is concerning the planting of 
the garden; and whensoever Tetragrammaton Elohim 
occurreth the full name is expressed. 

737. In IHVH IHVH all things generally are com- 
prehended, and then mercies are stirred up over all things. 

738. (When it is said) ** O Tetragrammaton! revive 
Thy work in the midst of the years," concerning the 
Ancient of Days 1s it said. 


Oe CREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 203 


739. What is “Thy work”? Zauir Anpin, Micro- 
prosopus. 

740. “In the midst of years.” These are the former 
years, which are called IMI QDM, Yemi Qedem, former 
days; and not years, OVLM, Olahm, or of the world. 

741. The former years are the former days; the 
years of the world are the days of the world.* 

742. And here (i 4s said): “In the midst of the 
years.’ What years? The former years. 

743. “ Revive it.” Concerning whom is it said, 
* Revive it”? Concerning Microprosopus. For all His 
splendour is preserved by those years, and therefore is it 
said, ** Revive it.” 

744. “In wrath remember mercy." He looketh to 
that supernal benignity wherein mercies are excited over 
all; (those mercies) who desire compassion, and to whom 
mercy is owing. 

745. We have learned, Rabbi Schimeon said: “I 
call to witness the heavens which are above me, towards 
all those who stand around, that great joy ariseth in all 
the worlds because of these words, 

746. * Also these words excite joy in my heart; and 
in the veil of excellent expansion are they hidden and 
do they ascend; and He, the Most Ancient One of all, 
preserveth them, He, the Concealed and Hidden of all. 

747. * And when we began to speak my companions 
knew not that all these words therein were worthy hereof 
in any degree. 

748. “O how blessed is your portion, companions of 
this conclave! and blessed is my portion with you in this 
world, and in the world to come!” 


* In connection with § 741, note Ps. lxxvii 5: “ΟΠΒΗΒΤΗΙ IMIM 
MQDM SaNVTn OVLMIM, I have considered the days of old, the years of 


ancient times.” 


204 KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER XXXIV 


CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


749. RABBI SCHIMEON commenced and said, Deut. 
iv. 4: “ And ye shall cleave unto Tetragrammaton your 
God," &c. 

750. What nation is so holy as Israel? for it is 
written concerning them, Deut. xxxiii. 29: “ Blessed 
art thou, O Israel! * who is like unto thee?” Because 
that they are applied unto God in this world through 
the holy name. 

751. And in the world to come more than here, for 
therein shall we never be separated from that conclave 
wherein the just are assembled. 

752. And this is that which is written: “And ye 
shall cleave in Tetragrammaton ;” for it is not written 
“ CHDBQIM LIHVH, Chedebegim Le Tetragrammaton, Ye 
shall cleave unto Tetragrammaton;” but * BIHVH, δε 
Tetragrammaton, in Tetragrammaton,” properly. 

στα, We have learned this. There is a descent from 
the beard which is venerable, holy, excellent, hidden and 
concealed in all (the beard, namely, of Macroprosopus), 
through the holy magnificent oil, into the beard of 
Microprosopus. 

754. And if thou shalt say that this beard is not to 
be found, for that even Solomon only spake of the 
cheeks,t but not at all of the beard. 

755. Truly thus have we learned (we make answer) in 
the * Book of Concealed Mystery." It is that which is 
hidden and recondite, and of which mention is not made, 


* Tt must not be forgotten that Israel is a mystical name which was sub- 
stituted for Jacob. 
t Namely, in the description in the Song of Solomon, ch. v. 


ee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 205 


neither is it uncovered ; it is that which is venerable and 
excellent before all things, seeing that it 1s concealed 
and hidden, 

756. And since the beard is the praise and perfec- 
tion and dignity of the whole countenance, in these 
sacred things it is found to be hidden, neither is it 
discerned. 

757. And that beard is the perfection and beauty of 
the countenance in Microprosopus. In nine conforma- 
tions 1s it disposed. 

758. But when the venerable beard of the Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones shineth upon this beard of Microproso- 
pus, then the thirteen fountains of excellent oil flow 
down upon this beard. 

759. And therein are found twenty-two parts, and 
thence extend the twenty-two letters of the holy law. 

760. Also we have learned that this beard departeth 
from His ears, and descendeth and ascendeth, and 
toucheth upon the places of fragrance. 

761. What are the places of fragrance? Like as it 
is said, Cant. v. 13: “ Like a bed (singular) of spices," 
and not * beds" ( plural). 

762. But this beard of Microprosopus is disposed in 
nine conformations. 

763. And also the hairs being black, and in careful 
order, like à handsome man, as it is written, Cant. v. 15: 
** Excellent as the cedars." 

764. The first conformation. The hair is conformed 
from the portion which is above, and there goeth forth 
therefrom a spark which is of most intense brilliance ; 
and it goeth forth from the Absolute of the pure ether, 
and passeth beneath the hair of the head, even beneath 
those locks which are above the ears; and it descendeth 
in front of the opening of the ears, hair above hair, even 
unto the beginning of the mouth. 

765. The second conformation. The hair goeth forth, 
and ascendeth from the one part of the mouth even unto 


206 KABBALAH, 


the other part of the opening of the mouth; and it 
descendeth beneath the mouth unto the other side, hair 
above hair, in beautiful arrangement. 

766. The third conformation. From the midst, be- 
neath the nose, and beneath the two nostrils, there goeth 
forth a certain path, and short and coarse hairs fill up 
that path; and the remaining hairs fill up the place from 
this side unto that, around this path. 

767. But this path is not clearly seen ({ο be continued) 
below (the mouth), but only the upper part of it which 
descendeth even unto the beginning of the lips, and 
there is this path applied. 

768. The fourth conformation. The hair goeth forth 
and is disposed in order, and ascendeth, and is spread 
over His cheeks, which are the place of fragrance of the 
Ancient One. 

769. The fifth conformation. The hair is wanting, 
and there are seen two apples on this side and on that, 
red as a red rose, and they radiate into two hundred and 
seventy worlds, which are enkindled thereby. 

770. The sixth conformation. The hair goeth forth 
as in a tress about (the border of) the beard, and 
hangeth down even unto the commencement of the vital 
organs, but it descendeth not unto the parts about the 
heart. 

771. The seventh conformation. That the hairs do 
nob hang over the mouth, but that the mouth is un- 
covered on every side, and that the hairs are disposed in 
order abont 1t. 

772. The eighth conformation. 'That the hairs descend 
beneath the beard, and cover the throat, so that 1t cannot 
be seen; all those hairs are slender, hairs above hairs, 
plentiful in every part. 

773. The ninth conformation. That the hairs are 
mingled together with those which are joined unto them ; 
and that they all are in equality from the cheeks even 
unto those hairs which hang down; all are in fair 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 207 


equality, like a brave man, and like a hero victorious in 
war. 

774. Through these nine conformations there proceed 
and flow down nine fountains of magnificent oil, and 
these indeed flow down from that magnificent supernal 
oil (of the beard of Macroprosopus) into all those inferiors. 

775. Those nine conformations are found in form 
herein (otherwise, in this beard); and in the perfection of 
the conformation of this beard is the inferior son of 
man called the brave man. * 

776. For whosoever seeth (in sleep) that his beard 
existeth in proper form,t in him is found courage and 
strength. 

777. Rabbi Schimeon spake unto Rabbi Eleazar his 
son, and said: “ Arise, O my Son and expound the 
parts of the holy beard in its conformations.” 

778. Rabbi Eleazar arose, and commenced and said, 
Ps. cxviii. 5: **I called upon ΤΗ, Yah, in my distress; 
Yah heard me at large.  Tetragrammaton is on my 
side, I will not fear; what can man do unto me? Tetra- 
grammaton taketh my part with them that help me, and 
I shall see my desire upon mine enemies. It is better 
to trust in Tetragrammaton than to put any confidence in 
man; itis better to trust in Tetragrammaton than to put 
any confidence in princes.’ 

779. “ Herein are delineated the nine conformations 
of this beard. For King David had need of these dispo- 
sitions, that he might vanquish other kings and other 
nations, 

780. * Come, behold! After that he had said these 
nine conformations, he added (verse 10): ‘ All nations 
compassed me about, but in the name of Tetragrammaton 
I will destroy them.’ 

. 781. “ Therefore did he rehearse those conformations 

* Meaning, that as is the Supernal Man so is the earthly man. 


+ Meaning, if he dreams that his beard is arranged like that of Micro- 
prosopus. 


208 KABBALAH. 


which we have repeated. But what was the necessity 
for so doing ? Because that he said: ‘All nations com- 
passed me about.’ For in this disposition of those nine 
conformations which are the name of IHVH, Tetra- 
grammaton, are they cut off from the earth. 

782. “This is that same which is written: ‘In the 
name of ΤΗΥ Η will I destroy them.’ 

783. “Also this have we learned in the ‘ Book of 
Concealed Mystery. David hath here enumerated the 
nine conformations; of which six consist in the holy 
name, for there are six names ;* and there are three in 
the word ADM, Adam, or man. 

784. * And if thou shalt say that there are only two 
(in the word Adam), assuredly there are three, because 
also the princes pertain unto the idea of the word Adam.t 

785. “This have we learned. These are the six 
names, because it is thus written: ‘I called upon Yah 
in my distress.’ The first. 

756. ** Yah heard me at large.’ The second. 

787. “*Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not 
fear. The third. 

788. ‘‘Tetragrammaton taketh my part with them 
that help me.’ The fourth. 

789. “ ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.’ 
The fifth. 

790. “ ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.’ 
The sixth. 

ποτ. * But in the word ADM, «άαπ, Man, are 
three; for it is written: ‘Tetragrammaton is on my 
side, I will not fear; what can ADM, Adam, Man, do 
unto me?’ ‘The first. 

792. “ ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton than 
to put any confidence in princes.’ The second. 


* Le, there are six repetitions of the name of the Deity in the verses 


under consideration. 
t Meaning, that the word princes, in the verse * than to put any confidence 
in princes," refers also to man. 


WIB GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 209 


793. ** It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton than 
to put any confidence in ADM, Adam, Man. The 
third. 

794. “And come, behold! ‘There is an Arcanum 
hidden in this thing; and wheresoever in this passage 
mention is made of the word ADM, Adam, thereunto 
the Holy Name is joined; and truly for a reason, seeing 
that man subsisteth only through that which is analogous 
unto himself. 

795. * But what is it which is analogous unto him? 
The Holy Name; because it is written, Gen. ii. 7: ‘ And 
IHVH ALHIM, Tetragrammaton Elohim, created ADM, 
Adam, Man, with the ful Name, which is IHVH 
ALHIM, analogous to him (Adam), seeing that IH VH, 
Tetragrammaton, denoteth the masculine, and ALHIM, 
Elohim, the feminine.* 

796. * And therefore in this passage there is no men- 
tion made of ADM, Adam, Man, without the Holy Name. 

797. * Also we have learned this. It is written: ‘I 
called upon IH, Yah, in my distress; IH, Yah, heard me 
at large. IH is here twice repeated, IH, TH, in refer- 
ence to the two jaws unto which the hairs (of the beard) 
adhere, and from which it is seen that the hairs issue and 
depend. 

798. * He hasteneth and saith ($e, King David): 
* IHVH, Tetragrammaton, is on my side; I will not fear; 
IHVH taketh my part with them that help me;' wherein 
the Name is not written defectively (ZH as before, but 
IHVH) which is the Holy Name, and with this Name 
mention is also made of man. 

799. * And what is this thing which is said, * What 
can ADM, Adam, Man, do unto me?' It is thus, as we 


* For Elohim is from the feminine root ALH, and is really a FEMININE 
PLURAL, for while many masculines form their plural in VTu, many feminines 
conversely form theirs in IM. In both these cases, however, the gender of 
the singular is retained in the plural. (See Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar, 
§ 86, art. 4. 

P 


210 KABBALAH. 


have learned by tradition: All those sacred diadems of 
the King,* when He is conformed in his dispositions 
(that is, when the letters of Tetragrammaton are all con- 
joined together), are called ADM, Adam, Man, which is 
the Form + which comprehendeth all things. 

800. * But when any portion is taken away there- 
from (that is to say, when it is said IH, and not IHV H), 
then is understood (Microprosopus) the Holy Name (by 
the letter I, Yod) and THORA, Tauara, or the Gate 
(that is, the Bride, to whom is attributed the name ADNI 
Adonai, whose number when written in its plenitude is 67 1,1 
as the word TaORA or TuROA exhibiteth it, summed up 
in the letter H, He, of the name IH), and that which is 
therein. 

801. * When therefore it is called Tetragrammaton, 
man is mentioned, with the Gate Tauara included, and 
those which are therein [otherwise, concerning the 
inferior worlds. And when it is taken away from the 
gate (that 1s, when the letters Vau and He are not joined 
hereunto, of which the latter denoteth the inferior gate), 
then is understood the Holy Name (by the Yod), and the 
Gate and those which are therein (by the He in the name 
IH) But when it is called IHVH, it is called the man, 
ADM, and all the rest (conjoined therewith), namely, the 
gate and those (paths) which are therein.] § 

802. *And therefore did David enumerate those 
nine conformations; because he uuto whom it is allowed 


* The King—i.e., Microprosopus. (See Introduction.) 


T For it is said that the Tetra- | τ | grammaton, written thus in the 


Hebrew letters, gives the figure | H | ofaman. For Fod = the head, 
He = the arms, Vau = the d body, and He final = the legs. 
Introduction.) 


(See Table of Hebrew letters in | —— 


t That is to say, when the letters of ADNI are spelt thus: ALP, DLTs, 
NVN, IVD, Aleph, Daleth, Nun, Yod; for A+L+P+D+L+Tu+N+V 
+N+I+V+D =1+4 30+ 804+4+ 30 + 400-50 1- 6+50+104+6+4 = 
671. And THORA or THROA = 400+70+200+1 = 671 also. 

§ The long piece above in brackets, but in ordinary type, is from the Cre- 
mona Codex. 


T CATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 211 


to touch the beard of the King can do all which he 
desireth. 

803. “ Wherefore then the beard, and not the body ? 
Because the body is hidden behind the beard, but the 
beard hath no place (of concealment) behind the body. 

804. * But he in reckoning it proceedeth in a duplex 
manner*—once as we have given it; and next thus, 
when he saith : *I called upon Yah in my distress. The 
first. 

805. ** Yah heard me at large. The second. 

806. “‘ Tetragrammaton is on my side; I will not 
fear. The third. 

807. ** What can man do unto me?’ ‘The fourth. 

808. “‘Tetragrammaton taketh my part with them 
that help me. The fifth. 

809. “ ‘And I shall see my desire upon mine ene- 
mies.’ The sixth. 

810. “ ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.’ The 
seventh. 

811. “'' Than to put any confidence in man. The 
eighth. 

812. “ ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.' 
The ninth, 

813. ** Than to put any confidence in princes.’ 
The tenth.] (Otherwise: ‘It is better to trust in 
Tetragrammaton than to put any confidence in man.’ 
The seventh, ‘It is better to trust in Tetragrammaton.’ 
The eighth. ‘Than to put any confidence in princes. 
The ninth.) 

814. **I called upon Yah in my distress, What 
is this which he saith? Assuredly doth David say all 
these things which are here said concerning the form of 
the beard.” I 


* Referring to the order of the conformations, and the way in which in the 
passage those referring to IHVH and ADM are conjoined. 

+ The reader will ot course also observe that these answer to the ten 
Sephiroth. 


pP? 


218 KABBALAH. 


815. Rabbi Yehudah answered and said: ‘‘ ‘TI called 
upon Yah in my distress? From the part where the 
beard beginneth to extend, which is from the more 
remote part (is one), before the ears, beneath the hair (is 
the second), And therefore is it twice said, IH, IH. 

816. * But in that place wherein the beard is ex- 
panded, and descendeth before the ears, in wider exten- 
sion, the name of ADM, Adam, Man, hath place (that 
is to say, the complete 'Tetragrammaton) Also this 
expansion was necessary to David when he wished to 
subject to himself the kings and nations through the 
dignity of this beard. (Otherwise, when therefore he 
saith, ‘ Tetragrammaton is on my side, I will not fear;' 
for this is such a one who spareth not the wicked, and 
this was altogether necessary, &c.) 

817. * Also we have learned this in the ‘ Book of 
Concealed Mystery '*: Whosoever seeth in his sleep that 
he toucheth the beard or moustache of the supernal man 
with his hand, or extendeth his hand unto it, let him 
know that he is at peace with the supernals, and that 
those who afflict him are about to be subjected unto 
him." f 

818. “ We have learned that the supernal beard is 
disposed in nine conformations, and that it is the beard 
of Microprosopus. 


* See ante, *' Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. iii. § 17. 

+ This is apparently the end of Rabbi Yehudah’s short interpolation 
regarding the duplicated IH. Rabbi Eleazar now apparently resumes the 
discourse. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 213 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


CONCERNING THE FIRST PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MICROPROSOPUS. 


819. “IN the first conformation the hair is disposed 
from above, and goeth forth before the opening of the 
ears, beneath the locks which hang down over the ears ; 
and the hairs descend, hairs above hairs, even unto the 
beginning of the mouth. 

820. “This have we learned. All those hairs which are 
in the beard are harder than all the hairs of the locks of 
the hair of the head. But the hair of the head is 
longer and bendeth more easily, while these hairs (of the 
beard) are not so long. 

821. “Οἱ the hairs of the head some are hard and 
some are soft. 

822. “ And whensoever the white locks of the Ancient 
of Days reach forward into Microprosopus, it is written 
that, Prov. i. 20: ‘ Wisdom crieth without.’ 

823. “ What is this (word) ‘without’? In this (in- 
stance) in Microprosopus, wherein are conjoined the two 
(forms of the) brain. Two forms of the brain, sayest thou? 
But it should rather be said, four forms of the brain. 

824. (Assuredly) * there are three (forms of the) brain 
in Microprosopus, and they are found in the three cavities 
of the skull of His head. 

825. “ And there is one calm and tranquil brain 
residing in its own clear brilliancy, which comprehendeth 
all the three (forms of the) brain, and from it are brought 
forth the productions of the hairs which are produced 
and continued in equilibrium in the white hair into that 
part of Microprosopus, into His three (forms of) brain 
(namely), so that therein in Him are found four (forms of 
the) brain. 


214 KABBALAH. 


826. “ And hence are perfected the four texts which 
are written on the phylacteries, because in them is con- 
tained the Holy Name of the Ancient of Days, the Ancient 
of the Ancient Ones, and that of Microprosopus. 

827. “ For this is the perfection of the Holy Name, 
concerning which it is written, Deut. xxviii. 10: ‘And 
all the people of the earth shall see that the name of 
Tetragrammaton hath been invoked over thee, and they 
shall be afraid of thee. 

828. “ The Name of the Lord is this very Name of Te- 
tragrammaton, which formeth the canals and hollows of 
the phylacteries. 

829. “And therefore is it said: ‘Wisdom crieth 
without, Prov. i. 20, because it is herein found (ie., in 
Microprosopus). 

830. * Fortruly the Ancient of the Ancient Ones, even 
He who is concealed with all concealments, is not found, 
neither doth His wisdom come forth (openly) ; seeing that 
His wisdom is concealed in all, and doth not make itself 
manifest. 

831. * And since there are four (forms of the) brain 
associated together, and that herefrom, even from Micro- 
prosopus, there flow down four fountains in four directions, 
and that they are all distributed from one fountain, 
which proceedeth from them all, therefore are there 
four." i 

832. “ Also we hare learned : From the Wisdom which 
is comprehended in the Quaternary the hairs flow down, 


* This four proceeding from one, and containing all things, is precisely the 
Pythagorean doctrine of the Tetractys, which Pythagoras probably obtained 
from qabalistic sources, though indeed most religions of antiquity attached 
considerable importance to this number four. Four is said to contain the 
whole Decad, because the sum of the first four numbers = ten; 1+2+3+4 
=10. But eight is the reflection of four, and eight is IHVH ADNI (see 
Introduction)., And 1+2+3+4+5+6+7+8 = 36, the number of the 
Decans (or groups of ten degrees) in the Zodiac. But 5+6+7+8 = 26, 
the number of the IHVH. Therefore thirty-six represents the sum of the 
letters of the Tetragrammaton, and the number of the Sephiroth. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 215 


which hang in curls upon curls, and all are strong and 
close, and they extend and flow down singly each in its 
own direction. 

833. “ And so many thousand thousand myriads of 
myriads depend from them that they are innumerable. 

834. “ This isthat same which is written, Cant. v. 11 : 
‘His locks are bushy, THLTHLIM, Teltelim, as if it 
were THLI THLIM, curls heaped upon curls. 

835. * And allare strong and close (fit) for breaking 
(whatsoever 1s opposed to them), hard as the rock, and as 
hardest stone. 

836. ‘ Until they can make openings in the skull, and 
the fountains can flow down beneath the locks, those 
strong fountains flow forth in separate directions, and in 
separate ways. 

837. “ And because those locks are black and obscure, 
it is written, Job xii 22: ‘ He discovereth deep things 
out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of 
death.’ 

838. * Also we have learned that those hairs of the 
beard are so much harder than those hairs of the head, 
because these alone make themselves so prominent, and 
are easily found, and are hard in their paths.* 

839. “ Wherefore sayest thou that they are hard? Is 
it because they all symbolize Judgment? By no means ; 
for truly in those dispositions Mercy as well as Judgment 
is found. 

840. * When the thirteen fountains of the rivers of oil 
descend, all these are mercies. 

841. “ But yet we have learned that all those hairs of 
the beard are hard. Wherefore? Those which symbolize 
mercies necessarily must be hard in order to divert the 
course of Judgment. 

842. “ And all those which denote Judgment, are also 
firm ; and therefore it 15 necessary in every instance that 
they should both be hard. 


* See definition of term ‘‘ path " in Introduction. 


216 KABBALAH. 


843. “When the Universe hath need of Mercy, mercies 
are strong, and prevail over Judgment; but when it re- 
quireth Judgment, Judgment is strong, and prevaileth 
over Mercy; and therefore is it necessary that in each 
instance they should be firm and strong. 

844. * And whensoever Mercy is required, those hairs 
which symbolize Mercy stand forth, and the beard is 
evident in those hairs only (otherwise, is contained by 
those hairs only), and all are abundant mercies. 

845. * But when Judgment is required the beard is 
evident in those hairs only (wAich denote judgment), and 
all consist in judgments. 

846. “ But when that holy white beard * is uncovered, 
all these (hairs denoting Mercy) and all those (hairs de- 
noting Judgment) are alike illuminated and made brilliant, 
like as when a man cleanseth himself in a deep river from 
his uncleanness. 

847. “ And all consist together in Mercy, and there is 
no Judgment to be found at all. 

848. “ And when all those f nine forms shine together, 
all are made white with Mercy. 

849. “And therefore Moses saith in another place, 
Num. xiv. 18: * Tetragrammaton is ARK APIM, Arikh 
Aphim, long-suffering (literally long of nose), and of great 
mercy.” 

850. “ And that which he had said concerning truth, 


* Which is of course that of Macroprosopus, the Ancient of Days. 

+ The nine conformations into which the beard of Microprosopus is 
divided. : 

t Igive these two passages side by side for the reader's benefit. 

Exod. xxxiv. 6 and 7: “ The Lorn, the Lorp God, merciful and gracious, 
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. 

“Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and 
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty ; visiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third 
and to the fourth generation.” 

Num. xiv. 18: “The Lorp is longsuffering, and of great mercy, for- 
giving iniquity and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, 
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and 
fourth generation.” 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 257 


Exod. xxxiv. 6, he addeth not (in this passage), because 
the Arcanum of the matter is these nine measurements 
which shine down from the Ancient of Days into 
Microprosopus. 

851. “For when Moses in the second passage rehearseth 
these praises of God, Num. xxiv. 18, he enumerateth the 
nine conformations; and these are the conformations of 
the beard, even those which are found in Microprosopus, 
and descend from the Ancient of Days and shine down 
into Him. 

852. “The word AMTn, Emeth, Truth, therefore de- 
pendeth from the Ancient One; whence in this passage 
Moses saith ποῦ : ‘ And in truth.’ 

853. “ We have learned that the hairs of the head of 
Microprosopus are all hard and curling, and not soft.* 

854. * For we see that in Him three forms of the brain 
are found in the three cavities (of the skull), which shine 
forth from the hidden and concealed brain. 

855. “ And because the brain of the Ancient of Days 
is tranquil and quiet, like good wine upon the lees, hence 
all His hairs are soft, and anointed with excellent oil. 

856. '' And therefore is it written, Dan. vii. ο: * His 
head like pure wool.’ 

857. * But those which are in Microprosopus are 
partly hard, and partly not hard, because they all hang 
down, and are not diverted from their course. 

858. “ And therefore Wisdom] floweth forth and 
proceedeth (therefrom); but it is not the Wisdom of 
Wisdom, for that is quiet and tranquil. 

859. “For we have learned that no one knoweth the 
brain of the Ancient of Days save Himself alone. 


* It appears to read thus in the Chaldee and in the Latin alike, though 
this statement is contradicted distinctly both in $ 587 and in $857. 
I should think the word '* LA, not," before “soft,” is a mistake, or else that 
the passage refers to the hair of the beard, and not that of the head. 

+ That is, Chokmah of the second Sephira, and not that Chokmah which 
is its root concealed in Kether ; for in Kether are all the other Sephiroth 
contained. 


218 KABBALAH. 


860. “This is that very thing which is said, Job xxviii. 
23: ‘God understandeth the way thereof,’ &c.; which 
(words) are spoken concerning Microprosopus.” 

861. Rabbi Schimeon said (unto him): “ Blessed be 
thou, O my son! in that Holy and Blessed One, in this 
world and in the world to come!” 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


CONCERNING THE SECOND PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MICROPROSOPUS. 


862. “THE second conformation. The hair goeth 
forth and ascendeth from the beginning of (the one side of ) 
the mouth even unto the beginning of the other side of 
the mouth; and descendeth beneath the mouth unto the 
other side, hair above hair, in beautiful arrangement. 
Arise, Rabbi Abba!” 

863. Rabbi Abba arose, and commenced and said : 
** When the disposition of this beard is instituted in the 
formation of the King, then is He Himself like a brave 
hero, strong and beautiful in appearance, valiant and 
conquering. 

864. “ This is that same which is written, Ps. exlvii. 
5: ‘Great is our Lord and great is His power.” 

865. “ And whilst He is mitigated by the disposition 
of the venerable and holy beard (of Macroprosopus), and 
this (beard of Mieroprosopus) reflected that, then through 
its light is He called ‘God merciful,’ Exod. xxxiv. 6: 
‘and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness 
and in truth.’ And thus is the second disposition insti- 
tuted. 

866. * When He shineth in the light of the Ancient 


Te GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 219 


of Days, then is He called ‘abundant in Mercy,’ and 
when another of the other forms is considered, in that 
form is He called ‘and in truth,’ for this is the light of 
His countenance." 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


CONCERNING THE THIRD PART OF THE BEARD OF 
MICROPROSOPUS. 


867. “ ALSO we have learned. Bearing iniquity is 
this second conformation called, like as in the Holy 
Ancient One. 

868. “ But because that path which goeth forth in 
the third disposition beneath the two nostrils is filled 
with short and rigid hairs; hence because of that path 
these conformations are not called ‘bearing inquity and 
passing over transgression;' but these are collected 
together in another place. 

869. “ Also we have learned in Barietha that three 
hundred and seventy-five mercies are comprehended in 
the benignity of the Ancient of Days; which are all 
called primal benignities. 

870. “ Like as it is said, Psalm Ixxxix. το: ‘ Where 
are thy former mercies?' And they are all com- 
prehended in the benignity of the Most Holy Ancient 
One, the most concealed of all. 

871. “ But the benignity of Microprosopus is called 
CuSD OVLM, Chesed Olahm, the benignity of time. 

872. “ And in the ‘ Book of Concealed Mystery ' (have 
we learned) that on account of the former benignity of 
the Ancient of Days is he called ‘ Abundant in Benig- 
nity.’ But in Microprosopus (the word) ‘ mercy ' is placed 
alone and absolutely. 


220 KABBALA H. 


873. * And therefore is it here written: ‘And 
abundant in benignity ;' and again it is written: ‘ Keep- 
ing mercy for thousands; plain and without addition. 

874. “And now we have taught concerning this 
Name, ‘ And abundant in benignity,’ because therefrom 
is mitigated the (interior) benignity, so that it may shine 
into all the lights (otherwise, this Name, ‘ Abundant in 
mercy, stretcheth down even unto the ‘mercy’ which 
is so called absolutely, so that it may illuminate it, and 
kindle the lights). 

875. “For we have learned that that path which 
descendeth beneath the two nostrils of the nose is filled 
with short hairs; and concerning this path, that it is 
written : ‘Passing over transgression’ (otherwise, and 
the shorter hairs fill that path. But that path is not 
called ‘ Passing over transgression’); because there is 
therein no occasion for passing over; for a double 
reason. 

876. “ Firstly, because that path is a hard place for 
passing over, (Otherwise, because the hairs which are 
found therein are hard.) 

877. “ Secondly, because the passing over of that path 
descendeth even unto the commencement of the mouth, 

878. * But concerning this it is written, Cant. v. 15: 
‘His lips like roses * (that is, red as roses), dropping 
sweet-smelling myrrh while passing over ;' which denoteth 
notable redness. 

879. “ And this path of that place is a duplex form, 
and is not mitigated, whence he who wisheth to threaten 
toucheth that path twice with his hand." 


* The English version of this passage renders it, ** His lips like lilies, 
dropping sweet-smelling myrrb.? The word here translated roses by 
Knorr de Rosenroth is Su VSnNIM, Shoshanim, which I think should 
undoubtedly be translated “lilies,” as in the ordinary version. The sym- 
bology of this chapter is very difficult and obscure. 


ο Ρα ασ. HOLY ASSEMBLY. 221 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


CONCERNING THE SEVEN LAST PORTIONS OF THE BEARD OF 
MICROPROSOPUS. 


880. ‘ THE fourth conformation. This path of hairs 
is disposed, and ascendeth and descendeth in His cheeks 
into the place of fragrance. 

881. * This disposition is fair and beautiful in 
appearance, and it is Glory and Honour; and it is taught 
in Barietha that the Supernal Honour, HVD, Hod, goeth 
forth and is crowned, and floweth down, so that it may 
be comprehended in His cheeks, and 15 called the Honour 
of the Beard. 

882. “ And thence depend Glory and Honour, which 
are as vestments, and as very precious purple, so that He 
may be clothed therewith. 

985. “ Bor it is written, Ps. civ. 1 : ‘ Thou art clothed 
with Honour and Majesty. (Otherwise: In the fourth 
conformation the hair goeth forth, and is disposed, and 
ascendeth and descendeth in the cheeks, in the places of 
fragrance. This conformation is elegant and beautiful in 
appearance, and it is the supernal glory. And this is 
the tradition : The supernal glory goeth forth, and is 
crowned, and floweth down in the beauty of the cheeks. 
And this glory is called the glory of the beard; and 
from it depend honour and glory, the vestments of 
adornment, those magnificent purple garments where- 
with he is clothed. Concerning which it is written: 
‘Thou art clothed with honour and majesty,’ which are 
the forms of clothing. In this form of man is he 
formed, rather than in any other form.) 

884. “These are the dispositions denoting the 
clothing (of the divine form), and he is more fitly sym- 


222 KABBALAH. 


bolized under this figure of man than under any other 
forms. 

885. ' Also we have learned, that when this glory 
(of Microprosopus) is illuminate by the light of the 
excellent beard,* and emitteth light into the other dis- 
positions, then it is called ‘ Bearing Iniquity ' on the one 
side, and ‘ Passing over Transgression °’ on the other side. 

886. “ And therefore in Scripture is it called by the 
name of his jawbones. 

887. * And in the ‘ Book of Concealed Mystery’ is 
the same called Glory, HVD,t Hod, and Honour, HDR, 
Hadar, and THPARTH, Tiphereth, Beauty. 

888. * And unto Tiphereth, Beauty, appertaineth the 
title * Passing over Transgression,’ since it is said, Prov. 
xix. I5 : ‘And it is His Beauty (T'üphereth) to pass over 
transgression.’ 

889. * Also we have learned that we should only 
refer that T'iphereth, Beauty, unto the ninth conformation 
(of the beard of Microprosopus) ; as it is said, Prov. xx. 
29: ‘And the beauty of young men is their strength.’ 
And therefore also is it (the ninth conformation) called 
Beauty; and when they are weighed together in the 
balance they are as one." 

890. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: '' Worthy art 
thou, O Rabbi Abba! for which reason mayest thou be 
blessed by the Most Holy Ancient One, from whom all 
blessings proceed. 

891. “ The fifth conformation. The hair is wanting, 
and there appear two apples, on this side and on that, 
red as red roses, and they radiate into two hundred and 
seventy worlds. 

892. “As to those two apples, when they shine on 
either side, from the light of the two supernal apples 
(the cheeks of Macroprosopus), redness is removed there- 
from, and a white brilliance cometh upon them, 


* Namely, that of Macroprosopus. 
t The eighth Sephira. t The sixth Sephira. 


me GhAATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 223 


893. “Concerning this is it written, Num. vi. 25: 
‘Tetragrammaton make His face shine upon thee, and be 
gracious unto thee.’ Seeing that when they shine he is 
blessed by the world. 

894. * But when that redness is stirred up (in them), 
it is written, ibid. 26: * Tetragrammaton take away His 
wrath from thee; as if it were said: ‘It is taken away, 
and wrath is no longer found in the world.’ 

895. *We have learned that all the lights which 
shine from the Most Holy Ancient One are called the 
former benignities, because all those lights are the 
benignities of time. 

896. The sixth conformation. The hair goeth forth 
as it were in a certain tress, among the hairs in the 
circumference of the beard; and this is called one of the 
five angles which depend from the CnuSD, Chesed, 
Mercy and Compassions, 

897. “ And it is not permitted to lose this benignity, 
as it is said. 

898. Therefore is it written, Lev. xix. 27: ‘Thou 
shalt not lose the angle of thy beard.’ 

899. “ The seventh conformation is that the hairs 
hang not over the mouth, and that the mouth is un- 
covered on every side. Arise thou, Rabbi Yehudah.” 

900. Rabbi Yehudah arose, and commenced, and 
said, Dan. iv. 17: ‘‘‘This matter is by the decree of 
the Watchers.’ 

gor. * Many thousands of myriads stand around, and 
are preserved by this mouth, and depend therefrom, 
aud all those are called (by the general title of) the 
mouth. 

902. “ As itis written, Ps. xxxiii. 6: ‘And all the 
host of them by the Spirit of His mouth.’ 

903. “ And by this Spirit which goeth forth from the 
mouth are all those exteriors clothed who depend from 
that mouth. 

904. “ And by that mouth, when that path is opened, 


224 KABBALAH. 


are clothed many true prophets; and they all are called 
the mouth of Tetragrammaton. 

905. “And in that place where the Spirit goeth forth 
no other thing is mingled therewith; for all things wait 
upon that mouth, that they may be clothed with the Spirit 
going forth therefrom. 

906. * And this disposition ruleth over the six 
(foregoing conformations), because herein are all things 
established and comprehended. 

907. ‘‘ And therefore are the hairs (of this conforma- 
(ion) equal around the mouth, and this itself is uncovered 
on every side." 

908. Rabbi Schimeon said (unto him): '' Blessed be 
thou, by the Most Holy Ancient One. 

909. “The eighth conformation is that the hairs 
descend beneath the beard, covering the throat, that it 
cannot be seen. 

οιο. *For we have learned in the exotic tradition 
that neither the throat nor any of its parts (are apparent) 
through (the hair), And if in the time of contest 
(otherwise of Victory, NTzCu, Vetzach*), during such 
contest any portion of (the throat) be visible, then it 
appeareth like Strength (Geburah).T 

Ο11. “For we have learned that a thousand worlds 
are contained thereby. 

912. ‘This is that which is said, Cant. iv. 4: 
‘Wherein there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields 
of mighty men.’ And this ‘thousand shields’ is an 
Arcanum, 

913. “ It is related in the ‘Book of Concealed Mys- 
tery’ that ‘all the shields of the mighty men’ which 
come from the side of the rigours, are derived from 
those severities (Geboran, GBVRAN). 

914. “The ninth conformation is that the hairs flow 


* The seventh Sephira. i The &fth Sephira. 
t We must not forget that in Microprosopus are “right and left," Mercy 
and Justice. 


WARC RAA TAR HOLY ASSEMBLY. 225 


down in perfect equilibrium even unto those hairs which 
hang down beneath, and all of them in beautiful arrange- 
ment, like (that of) a brave hero, (of) a chief victorious 
in war. 

915. ‘ Because all the hairs follow those which hang 
down, and all are joined unto those which hang down, 
and each holdeth its own course. 

916. “Concerning this it is written, Prov. xx. 29: 
‘The beauty of a young man is his strength.’ 

917. “ And He appeareth upon the (Red) Sea,* like a 
beautiful youth, which is written in Cant. v. 16: ‘Ex- 
cellent (or young) as the cedars.’ 

918. “Like a hero hath He exhibited His valour, and 
this is that THPARTu, CHILA, VGBVRTBA, VRCHMI, 
Tphereth, Chila, Ve-Geburatha, Ve Rechemi, Beauty, 
Strength, and Valour, and Mercy.” 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


CONCERNING THE BODY OF MICROPROSOPUS IN GENERAL, 
UNDER THE CONDITION OF AN ANDROGYN. 


gig. THis have we learned. Rabbi Schimeon said: 
All those dispositions and all those words ought to be 
revealed by those who are weighed in the balance, and 
not by those who have not entered therein, but by those 
who have both entered therein and departed therefrom. 
For he who entereth therein and goeth not out therefrom, 
better were it for that man that he had never been born. 

920. The sum of allis this: The Ancient of the 
Ancient Ones existeth in Microprosopus; He is the all- 
existent One; He was all, He is all, He will be all; He 
will not be changed, neither is He changed, neither hath 
He been changed. 

+ Microprosopus, the au, V, of IHVH. The sea is Binab, the Supernal 
Mother, the third Sephira, and the first H of IHVH. 

Q 


226 KABBALAH. 


921. But by means of those conformations hath He 
conformed Himselfin that form which comprehendeth all 
forms, in that form which comprehendeth all names. 

922. But this form wherein He Himself only ap- 
peareth is inthe similitude of this form; and is not that 
form, but is analogous unto this form *—namely, when 
there are associated therewith the crowns and the 
diadems and the perfection of all things. 

923. And therefore is the form of the man the form 
of the superiors and inferiors which are included therein. 

924. And because that form comprehendeth the 
superiors and the inferiors, therefore by such a dis- 
position is the Most Holy Ancient One conformed ; and 
thus also is Microprosopus configurated in this disposition, 

925. Andif thou sayest: What, then, is the difference 
between the one and the other ? 

926. Assuredly all things are equally (balanced in the) 
Unity. But yet from our point of view (1.ο., from our 
plane) His paths are divided, and from our point of view 
(on our plane) is judgment found, and from the side 
which is turned towards us are (His attributes) by turns 
duplicated.T 

027. And these Arcana are not revealed save unto the 
reapers of the Sacred Land. 

928. For it is written, Ps. xxv. 14: “The secret of 
Tetragrammaton is with them that fear Him." 

929. Also 15 is written, Gen. n. 7: “ΠΠ 
IHVH ALHIM ATH HADM, Va- Yeyetzer Tetragrammaton 
Elohim Ath Ha-Adam.y And Tetragrammaton Elohim 


* I take the sense of this second clause to be that He is not really in the 
outward and visible form of a material man ; but that he can be best expressed 
hereby in a symbolic spiritual form. Cf. Ezek. i. 26: " And upon the 
LIKENEss of the throne was the LIKENESS as the APPEARANCE of a man 
above it." 

+ In connection with this section read ch. 1. δὲ 5, 6, 7, and 8, of the '* Book 
of Conese Mystery.” 

+ T.e., to the students of the Qabalah. 
§ Beet also “Book of Concealed Mystery," ch. ii. § 23. 


ee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 257 


formed the substance of man, completed (Aim) formation 
by formation from the most ethereal (portion) of the 
refined (clement of) earth (otherwise formation within 
formation from the best, &c.) 

930. And thisis Va-Yeyetzer VIYTZR, written with two 
Yods, Fs (instead of VITzR, Va-Yetzer, with one Yod, I). 

931. Wherefore? ‘There is an Arcanum of the Most 
Holy Ancient One, and an Arcanum of Microprosopus. 

932. VIITzh, Va-Yeyetzer, and formed. What did 
(Tetragrammaton Elohim) form? Form in form. And 
this is VIITZzR. 

933. And what is form in form? The two names, 
which are called the full name, IHVH ALHIM, Tetra- 
grammaton Elohim. 

934. And this is the Arcanum of the two I's, Yods, 
in VIITZR; and of how it hath been conformed form 
within form; namely, in the disposition of the perfect 
name, Tetragrammaton Elohim. 

935. And in what are they comprehended? In the 
supernal beard (otherwise, in this supernal form which is 
called (the supernal) man; the man who comprehendeth 
Male and Female equally). 

936. And therefore is it written: “ATH HADM, 
Ath Ha-Adan (τὸν ἄνθρωπον), the substance of man,” 
because it comprehendeth equally the Male and the 
Female, for to the word ADM, ATH is subjoined, so as to 
extend and exaggerate the species which is here pro- 
duced. Most assuredly here therefore is it as Male and 
as l'emale. 

937. *OPR MN HADMH, Ophir Men Ha-Adamah, 
from the dust of the ground," dust, form within form 
(otherwise, from the most ethereal portion of the refined 
element of earth, one within the other). 

938. But wherefore are all these things so ? Because 
that from the supernals there was sent down into him 
(Man) the Arcanum of the supernal Arcana, even the end 
of all Arcane. 


Q 2 


228 KABBALAH. 


939. This is that which is herein written: “ VIPCH 
BAPIV NSHMTHCuHIIM, Ve- Yepech Be-Ephaiu Neschamath 
Chiim, and breathed into his nostrils the Neschamath* of 
(their) lives.” 

940. Their souls, from which all things living, superiors 
and inferiors, alike depend, and wherein they have their 
existence. 

941. “VIHI HADM ΤΝΡΡΗ Cal, Va- Yehi Ha-Adam 
Le-Nephesch Chiah, and the Adam was formed into a 
living Nephesch,” so that it (the physical Nephesch form) 
might be attached to himself (otherwise, so that it might 
be developed in him), and that he might form himself 
into similar conformations ; f and that he might project 
himself in that Neschamah from path into path,i even 
unto the end and completion of all the paths. 

942. So that in all this Neschamah might be found, 
and that it might be extended into all, and that it itself 
might be still one. 

943. Whence he who taketh this away from the 
universe doth the same thing as if he should take away 
this Neschamah for the purpose of setting in its place 
another Neschamah beside it.§ 

944. And therefore shall such a man and his re- 
membrance be cut off from generations unto generations, 


* Neschamath is either the plural of Neschamah, defectively written, or 
else shows that Neschamah is in regimine to Chiim, and evidently means the 
united higher souls of both Adam and Eve conjoined in one body. (For 
explanation of Neschamah, &c., see Introduction.) 

+ That is into conformations similar to those of the Supernal Man. 

+ That is, into forms, conditions, and qualities analogous to the Sephiroth. 
(See Introduction regarding the soul, and Plate showing the analogy between 
the soul, the letters of Tetragrammaton, and the four worlds, where the 
Sephiroth are shown reflected in Nephesch.) 

§ Apparently the sense of this passage is intended to combat Atheism, 
and to show thai it is logically absurd to deny the existence of a Spirit of 
God which works in the universe ; inasmuch that if this be denied, at all 
events something analogous in its general properties will have to be substi- 
tuted for it. 


Gee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 229 


CHAPTER XL. 


CONCERNING THE FEMININE PORTION OF MICROPROSOPUS j 
AND CONCERNING THE REMAINING PARTS OF THE BODY 
OF EACH. 


945. THUS in this Adam androgyneity hath com- 
menced to be disposed when it hath been formed in 
its disposition. It hath commenced from His back. 
(Otherwise, from His breast.) 

946. Between the two arms, in that part whereunto 
the beard hangeth down, which is called Tiphereth, the 
Beauty. 

947. And this Beauty is expanded and disposeth 
two breasts. 

948. And it is separated from the back, and pro- 
duceth the Head of a Woman completely covered on 
every side by Her hair as far as to (the limits of ) the face 
of Her head. 

949. Insomuch that through that Tiphereth, Beauty, 
Adam becometh in one body, Male and Female. 

950. This is that which is written, Isa. xliv. r3: 
“According to the beauty of a man, KTHPARTH 
ADM, Ke-Tiphereth Adam, that it may remain in the 
house.” 

951. When the countenance of the Female Head is 
created, one curled lock of hair at the back of Micro- 
prosopus hangeth over the head of the Woman. 

952. And all hairs red gold are produced in Her 
head; yet so that other colours are intermixed there- 
with. 

opcs is that which is written, Cant. vii. 5: 
“The hair of Thy head like ARGMN, Argaman, purple.” 

954. What is Argaman? Colours intermixed with 
other colours. 


230 KABBALAH. 


955. This Tiphereth, Beauty, hath been extended from 
the heart, and penetrateth it, and passeth through unto 
the other side, and instituteth the formations from the 
Countenance of the Woman even unto Her heart ; so that 
from the parts about the heart it taketh its rise on this 
side, and in the parts about the heart it terminateth on 
that side. 

956. Moreover, this Tiphereth is extended, and it 
formeth the internal parts of a Man. 

957. And it entereth into and disposeth therein all 
mercies and aspects of mercies. 

958. Also we have learned that in those internal 
parts are comprehended six hundred thousand Lords 
of Mercies, and that they are called the Lords of the 
Internal Parts. 

959. Whence it is written, Jer. xxxi. 20: “ There- 
fore My bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have 
mercy upon him, saith Tetragrammaton." 

960. We have learned that this Tiphereth, Beauty, 
embraceth Mercies and Judgment, and that Mercy is 
extended in the Male. 

961. And it passeth over and goeth through unto 
(otherwise, shineth on) the other side, and formeth the 
internal parts of a Woman on the side of Judgment ; 
and thus also are Her internal parts disposed. 

962. We have learned that the Male hath been con- 
formed on His side (otherwise, from His heart), in 248* 
members; of which some are within, some without; 
some Mercies, some Judgments. 

963. All which pertain unto Judgment, cohere in 
Judgment around the hinder part, where the Woman is 
extended; and they coalesce and are extended round 
about on that side. 

964. Also we have learned that five nakednesses can 
be revealed on that side, which are the five judgments ; 


* The number of 248 = RCuM, Rechem = Mercy + 248; thus con- 
veying this idea in the number. 


Wee GREATER OLY ASSEMBLY. 234 


and these five judgments are extended into 248 
paths.* 

965. And thus have we learned: the voice in the 
Woman is uncovered ; the hair in the Woman is un- 
covered ; the leg* in the Woman is uncovered ; the hand 
in the Woman is uncovered; the foot in the Woman is 
uncovered. 

966. And also, furthermore, concerning these two our 
companions have not inquired, yet these two have more 
nakedness, 

967. Also, we have learned in the “ Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery” that the Male is extended and con- 
formed with His parts, and there is formed in Him forma 
partis tegendee pure, et illud est membrum purum. 

968. Longitudo autem membri hujus est 248 mun- 
dorum, et omnes ill pendent in orificio membri hujus, 
quod liser I, Yod. 

969. Et cum detegitur Yod, ο Ἢ membri; de- 
tegitur Benignitas superna.i 

970. And this member is the Benignity, quo nomine 


* For five is H, He, the number of the feminine letter in the Tetra- 


grammaton, the number also of the Microcosm or 
Lesser World, the symbol or sign of which is the 
Pentragram. The 248 paths into which the 
five judgments are ex- tended are the correlates 


of those of mercy. 


+ This word is SHVQ, Shoq, in the original. Fuerst translates it Leg, 
especially the part from knee to ankle. So does Gesenius in his Lexicon ; 
but in his large Hebrew and Chaldee Thesaurusit is, apparently by an over- 
sight, omitted. Zanolini translates it “Armus, Crus,” and adds: “In 
ῬΕΚΥ͂ΤΗ, Berachoth, fol. 24, ‘SHVQA BASaH ORVH, Crura in muliere 
res pudenda sunt, scilicet crura nuda, Hinc in more positum apud Judeos 
est, ut ipsorum mulieres, et puelle demissis ad talos vestibus verecundiz 
caussa utantur, ne viros ad libidinem excitent.'" (‘ Lexicon Chaldzeo-Rab- 
binicum,” art. Su VQ.) 

t I have thought it advisable to retain this piece in the Latin, as it will 
be equally intelligible in that language to the ordinary student ; and it is not 
so well fitted for expression in Euglish. It contains tke symbolism of the 
genitalia. 


232 KABBALAH. 


tamen proprie vocatur orificium membri; neither is it 
called Benignity until I, Yod, orificii membri, is un- 
covered. 

971. And come, behold, Abraham is not called perfect 
in that Benignity, until L, Yod, of the member is un- 
covered ; but when that is uncovered he is called perfect.* 

972. This is that which is written: ‘‘ Walk before 
Me and be thou perfect; really and truly perfect, Gen. 
XS. 

973. Also it is written, Ps. xviii. 24 : “I will be up- 
right before Him, and will keep myself from the sinner." 

974. Who is he concerning whom the discourse is both 
in the first and second instance (in this passage)? As- 
suredly, he who uncovereth that Yod; et cavet, ne Yod 
istud introducat in potestatem adversam; so that he may 
have part in the world to come, and that he may be 
bound together in the sheaf of life. 

975. What is this, “in potestatem adversam ” ? 
Even that which is written, Mal. 1.11: “ And hath 
married the daughter of a strange god.” 

976. And therefore is it written: “' I will be upright 
before Him," because he hath become perfect in the 
uncovering of Yod,’ and I will keep myself from the 
sinner.” 

977. Et dum extenditur membrum hoc, etiam exten- 
ditur latus rigoris de illis rigoribus sinistre in feemina. 

978. Et inseritur in feminam, in loco quodam, et 
signatioram facit in nuditate, seu parte maxime conte- 
genda in toto corpore feeminino. | 

* This apparently refers to the qabalistical symbolism of the changing 
of the names of Abram and Sarai into Abraham and Sarah; ABRM and 
SHRI into ADBRHM and SHRH ; ABRM = 24315 made iuto ABRHM = 248 
by addition of the number 5, the letter H, He; and SHRI = 510 is made 
SHRH = σος by the subtraction of five from the final I, Yod; 248 is 
tne number of the members of Microprosopus, and 5 is that of the five 
judgments. Hence the united numbers of Abram and Sarai, 243-4- 510 = 
753, which number is also obtained by the addition of Abraham and Sarah, 


2484-505 = 753; so that the total numeration of the two names remains 
unchanged. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 233 


979. Et ille locus dicitur nuditas ab omnibus occul- 
tanda, locus scilicet pro membro illo, quod dicitur 
Benignitas, ut scilicet mitigetur rigor iste, qui continet 
quinque rigores. 

980. And that Benignity comprehendeth in itself five 
Benignities (otherwise, and herein existeth the Benignity 
from the other Benignities). And Benignity is from those 
on the right, but Severity from those on the left. 

981. And when the latter is mitigated by the former 
He 1s called man, consisting 1n both aspects. 

982. And therefore in all the crowns (the former state of 
things) was not permanent, before that the conformations 
of the King* were prepared by the Ancient of the Ancient 
Ones, so that He might construct the worlds, and form 
(their) conformations, for the purpose of establishing 
that Woman,[ so that She might be mitigated. 

983. Until the supernal Benignity could descend, and 
then the conformations of the Woman became permanent, 
and were mitigated by this member (of Microprosopus), 
which is called the Benignity. 

984. This is that which is written, Gen. xxxvi.: * And 
these are the kings which reigned in the land of Edom; ” 
which is the place where all the judgments are found, 
and they are the constitutions of the Woman. 

985. For it is not written, '' Who were," but '' Who 
reigned,” because they were not mitigated until all were 
formed, and that Benignity went forth. 

986. Therefore is it said,“ And he died," because they 
were not permanent, neither was Judgment mitigated 
through Judgment. 

987. But, and if thou sayest: “ That if it be thus that 
all are judgments, wherefore is it written, Gen. xxxvi. 

* Microprosopus. 

+ Malkuth, the tenth Sephira, the Kingdom, the Queen, the Bride of 
Microprosopus; the Isis, Rhea, Ceridwen, Hertha, &c., of other religions; 
Nature, the Great Mother of us all. 


+ Compare with this the meaning of the names of the two Pillars at the 
entrance to King Solomon's Temple. 


234 KABBALAH. 


37 : * And Saul of Rechoboth * by the waters reigned in 
his stead,’ for this man truly doth not appear (£o symbolize) 
a judgment ? " 

988. We have learned that all denote judgment, 
excepting one, which last remaineth. 

989. But this Saul of Rechoboth by the waters is 
one order (otherwise, one side or aspect), an order which 
is expanded, and goeth forth from Rechoboth by the 
waters. 

990. And this is Binah, wherefrom are opened the 
fifty gates T in the aspects of the world of lights and 
luminaries. - 

991. This is what is said concerning Rechoboth by 
the waters. And they were not all permanent. Thou 
shalt not say that they were abolished, but that they 
were not permanent in that kingdom which is from the 
side of the Woman. 

992. Until there was excited and extended that Last 
One of them all concerning whom it is said: “ And 
Hadar, HDR, reigned after him.” 

993. Who is Hadar? The Supernal Benignity.t 

994. * And the name of his city was POV, Paau 
(crying aloud).” What is Paau? Through this the 
man prayeth who is worthy of the Holy Spirit. 

995. “And the name of his wife was Jfcchetabel, 
MCuITBAL,” herein are they mitigated together, and his 
(Hadar’s) wife is named, which is not written concerning 


any other of them, MCOnITBAL, AMechetabel (which bears 


* It is not at first sight clear why Saul of Rechoboth should be taken 
exception to as symbolizing judgment. But if we examine the word 
RCnHVBVTn, echoboth, by Gematria, we shall find a reason. For 
R+Cu+V+B+V+Tu = 200+8+6+2+6+400+622 = BRKTH, 
Berachoth, Blessings, and also ‘‘ pools of water," which is also ** Rechoboth 
by the waters. And “the waters " are Binab, the third Sephira. 

+ Vide ante in the ** Book of Concealed Mystery." 

i For HDR = 213, which = CuSD OLAH DAL, Chesed Aulaeh Da- 
El, the Supernal Mercy of El = 213 also. And Chesed is the fourth 
Sephira, which succceds Binah the third, as Hadar succeeds Saul of Recho- 
both by the waters. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 235 


the signification of “as if were made better by the name of 
Benignity, AL, El, MCHI TB AL"), mitigation of the one 
by the other. 

996. “The daughter of MTRD, Maítred," the elabo- 
rations on the side of Severity: “the daughter of 
MIZHB, AMezahab;" that is, they have been firmly con- 
tempered and intertwined together—namely MI, Me, 
Mercury,* and ZHB, Zahab, Gold, Mercy and Judg- 
ment. 


CHAPTER XLI. 


CONCERNING THE SEPARATE MEMBERS OF EACH PERSONIFI- 
CATION, AND ESPECIALLY CONCERNING THE ARMS OF 
MICROPROSOPUS. 


997. HEREUNTO have adhered together both the 
Woman and the Man; now in Their condition are They 
separated in arms and limbs. 

998. Of the Male, one arm is right and the other 
left. 

999. In the first arm (otherwise, in the holy arm) 
three members f (or divisions) are bound together. 

1000. And the two arms are completed. And they 
are perfected in three members in the right arm, and in 
three members in the left arm. 

1001. The three members of the right arm corre- 
spond to the three members of the left arm. 

1002. And therefore is mention only made of the one 


* This partakes of alchemical symbolism—Mezahab, the philosophical 
Mercury. 

Ἐ As in the arm there are three natural divisions, from shoulder to elbow, 
from elbow to wrist, and from wrist to the tips of the fingers. The word 
QSuRIN, here translated '' members," means, properly speaking, “ zones." 


236 KABBALAH. 


arm. For of the arms there is only made mention of that 
on the right side ; but in Exod. xv. 6 it is called, “ Thy 
right hand, O Tetragrammaton | 7 

1003. Therefore it is said “the right hand of Tetra- 
grammaton,” with reference to the three divisions of the 
Patriarchs * who have occupied those parts. 

1004. And if thou shalt say: ‘‘ Also these are found 
(symbolized) in the three cavities of the skull.” 

1005. We have learned that all these three (as to 
their conceptions) are expanded through and connected 
with the whole body (of Microprosopus) through those 
three which are bound together in the right arm. 

1006. And therefore David desired Him, and said, 
Ps, cx. 1: “Sit thou with those on my right hand,” 
that he might be associated with the Patriarchs, and sit 
there in the perfect throne. 

1007. And therefore it is written, Ps. cxviii. 22: 
“ The stone which the builders rejected,” because that 
he sat on the right hand. 

1008. This is that which is written, Dan. xii. 13: 
* And thou shalt rest, and rise again in thy lot at the 
limit of My right hand.” f 

1009. Like as if it were said: '' Even as he who is 
worthy of the friendship of the King is happy when the 
King extendeth His right hand, and placeth him at His 
right hand. 

1010. But when He sitteth, certain members are 
extended as to this right hand, but the arm extendeth 
not the hand (otherwise, when He sitteth, also the 
members are not extended, and the arm is not stretched 


* This word in the original is ABHT#A, Hbahatha, which, according to 
the context, may mean simply “Fathers” ; or, in a more emphatic sense, 
* Patriarchs ;" this latter is the sense in which it is employed in this 
passage. The three Patriarchs are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for this 
word Ebahatha is not employed to denote the twelve sons of the latter. 

+ This is usually translated ‘‘at the end of the days." This translation 
is simply due to a difference in the pointing, the words being the same in 
orthography—thus, IMIN. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 237 


forth, but remaineth still), with its three members, of 
which mention hath been made before. 

1011. But when sinners are stirred up and spread 
abroad in the world, three other members are excited, 
which are severe judgment, and His arm is stretched forth. 

1012. And when that arm is stretched forth, it is as 
it were the right hand (also); but it is called “ the arm 
of Tetragrammaton ”: “Ὁ Tetragrammaton ! Thine arm 
hath been stretched forth " (1 Kings viii. 42). 

IOI3. When these three members are contained in 
those three, all are called the right hand, and judgment 
is exercised and mercy. 

1014. This is that which is said, Exod. xv. 6: “ Thy 
right hand, O Tetragrammaton, is marvellous 1n power ; 
with Thy right hand, O Tetragrammaton wilt Thou dash 
in pieces the enemy ; " seeing that therein are stirred up 
the mercies. 

1015. Also, we have learned that unto this right 
hand adhere three hundred and seventy thousand my- 
riads (otherwise, which are called the right hand, and 
one hundred and eighty-five thousand myriads) from the 
arm, which is called the arm of Tetragrammaton. 

1016. Therefore, from either side is the arm (1.ο., it 
is either the right arm or the left arm), because that it is 
said (to be) on either side of Tiphereth.* 

1017. For it is written, Isa. lxi. 12: “That led 
Moses to his right hand, by the arm of his Tiphereth.” 

1018, The first expression denoteth the right; but 
the “arm” denoteth the left; for it is written, * by the 
arm of his Tiphereth,’ one (side) with the other ({ε., 
right and left). 

1019. Moreover, we have learned that to that which 
is on the left side there adhere four hundred and fifty t 


* See table of the Sephiroth, &c., in the Introduction, where it will be 
seen that Tiphereth is as it were the centre. 

t 450 = ΤΗΝ, Than, which is the root of Serpent or Dragon. Compare 
Leviathan, which is probably formed from this root. 


238 KABBALAH. 


Lords of Shields, and that they adhere unto those sepa- 
rate fingers. 

1020. And in the single fingers there are found ten 
thousand Lords of the Shields. Go thou then forth, and 
number how many of them there are in the hand. 

1021. And this right hand is called the Holy Aid, 
which cometh forth from the right arm, from the three 
members (tAercof). 

1022. And although it be called the hand, yet is it 
Aid, since it is written, 2 Sam. 11. 12: ‘‘ And behold, 
My Hand is with thee.” 

1023. And in it are contained one thousand and four 
myriads and five hundred and eight thousand lords, the 
aiders in every world,* who are called the supernal hand 
of the Tetragrammaton, the inferior hand of the Tetra- 
grammaton. 

1024. And although everywhere it be called the hand 
of Tetragrammaton, it is understood (that sometimes) the 
left hand 1 (is intended to be spoken of). For if they be 
benevolent, itis called the right hand of Tetragrammaton, 
and the hand is included in the arm, and is for aid, and 
is called the hand; and if, on the other hand, it be not 
so, the inferior hand of Tetragrammaton is (to be wnder- 
stood ). 

1025. We have learned that when the severe judg- 
ments are excited so that they may descend into the 
world, that then it is written, Ps. xxv. 14: “The Ar- 
canum of Tetragrammaton is over those who fear Him.” 


* That is, on every qabalistical plane. (See Introduction regarding the 
Four Worlds, &c.) 

+ For in Microprosopus there is always right and left, Mercy and Justice; 
while in Macroprosopus all is said to be "right." But Microprosopus is 
manifest, and Macroprosopus is hidden. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 239 


CHAPTER XLII. 


CONCERNING THE SEPARATION OF THE MASCULINE AND THE 
FEMININE, AND CONCERNING THEIR CONJUNCTION. 


1026. ALso we have learned in the “ Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery " * that all the judgments which arise from 
the Masculine are vehement in the commencement, and 
relax in the termination ; but that those which are found 
to arise from the Feminine are relax in commencement, 
and vehement in termination. 

1027. And were it not that they could be conjoined, 
the world could not suffer them ; whence the Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones, the Concealed by all things, separateth 
the one from the other, and associateth them together so 
that at once they may be mitigated. 

1028. And when He wisheth to separate them He 
causeth an ecstasy (or trance, cf. Gen. ii. 21) to fall 
upon Microprosopus, and separateth the Woman from 
His back. 

1029. And He conformeth all Her conformations, and 
hideth Her even unto Her day, on which She is ready to 
be brought before the Male. 

1030. This is that which is said, Gen. ii. xxi.: “ And 
Tetragrammaton Elohim caused a deep sleep to fall upon 
Adam, and he slept." 

1031. What is this,“ And he slept?" This is that 
which is written, Ps. xliv. 24: “ Awake! wherefore 
sleepest thou, O Tetragrammaton ὃ” 

1032. And He taketh away one of his sides. What 
is this one? This is the Woman. 

1033. And She is taken away and conformed ; and 
in Her place is inserted Mercy and Benignity. 


κ See “Book of Concealed Mystery," ante, ch. iii. $ 27. 


240 KABBALAH. 


1034. Like as it is said: ** And he hath shut up flesh 
before her." Ezek. xxxvi. 26: “ And I will take away 
from you the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will 
give you a heart of flesh." 

1035. And when He wisheth to introduce the Sab- 
bath, then did He create the spirits, and the malignant 
demons, and the authors of disturbance; neither at first 
did He finish them, until the Mother could come into 
Her formation, and could sit before Him. 

1036. When She could sit before Him, He ceased from 
those creatures, and they were not completed because 
the Mother sat before the King, and they were associated 
together face to face. 

1037. Who shall enter between Them? Who shall 
stir up war between Them mutually ? 

1038. Because the Arcanum of the matter is hidden 
in the time of the disciples of wisdom, who know our 
Arcanum, from Sabbath unto Sabbath. 

1039. And when They are associated together, then 
are They mutually mitigated in that day on which all 
things are mitigated. And therefore are the judgments 
mitigated mutually and restored into order, both superiors 
and inferiors. 


CHAPTER XLIII. 
CONCERNING THE JUDGMENTS. 


1040. ALSO, we have learned in the * Book of Con- 
coaled Mystery " that when the Most Holy Ancient One 
desired to see whether the judgments could be mitigated, 
and whether these two could adhere together, that then 
from the side of the Woman there went forth a vehement 
judgment, which the world could not bear. 


* See “Book of Concealed Mystery," ch. iii. $$ 27-31. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 241 


1041. Whence it is written: “ And Adam knew Eve 
his wife” (Gen. iv. 1). And she conceived and brought 
forth QIN, Qain, and said: “ I have acquired a man with 
Tetragrammaton." 

1042. And She was not perfect, because She had not 
been mitigated, and the powerful serpent had transmitted 
unto Her the pollution of severe judgment; and there- 
fore She could not be mitigated. 

1043. When therefore this man Qain proceeded from 
the side of the Woman, he went forth vigorous and 
severe ; severe in his judgment, rigorous in his judgment. 

1044. But when he had gone forth, She Herself be- 
came thereafter weaker and more gentle. And there 
went forth another and gentler birth. 

1045. And the former one was removed, which was 
so vehement and rigorous that all the judgments could 
not be mingled together before Her. 

1046. Come and see. What is written? “And it 
came to pass when they were both in the field." “ In the 
field," which is known to be the supernal (field) ; “in the 
field,’ which is called the field of the apple-trees. 

1047. And this judgment hath conquered his brother 
because he is stronger than he, and hath subdued him, 
and hath concealed him in his own power. 

1048. Then therefore, that Holy God was stirred up 
regarding this—may His Name be blessed !—and took 
him away from the midst before him, and placed him 
in the mouth of the Great Abyss. 

1049. And enclosed his brother by immersion in the 
Great Sea, so that he might temperate the supernal tears. 

1050. And from them men descend in the world 
according to their path. 

1051. And although they are concealed, yet are they 
extended mutually in themselves and from one body. 

1052. And from that body descend the souls, NSHM- 
THHVN, of the impious, of the sinners, and of the har- 
dened in spirit. 

R 


242 KABBALAH. 


1053. From them both at once, dost thou think? 
No; but one floweth down from the one side, and 
another from the other. 

1054. Blessed are the just, whose NSHMTHHVN, 
souls, are drawn from that Holy Body which is called 
Adam, which includeth all things ; the place, as it were, 
wherein all the Crowns and Holy Diadems are associated 
together, arrayed in the equilibrium of balance. 

1055. Blessed are the just, because all these are holy 
words which are sent forth through the Supernal Holy 
Spirit, the spirit wherein all the Holy Ones are compre- 
hended ; the spirit in whom the supernals and inferiors 
are collected together (otherwise, whom the supernals 
and inferiors hear). 

1056. Blessed are ye, O Lords of Lords, Reapers of 
the Field, who know and contemplate those words, and 
know well your Lord, face to face, and eye to eye; and 
through those words worthy in the world to come. 

1057. This is that very thing which is written, Deut. 
iv. 39: * Know therefore this day, and consider it in 
thine heart, that Tetragrammaton, He is Elohim (HVA 
HALHIM), in the heavens above, and upon the earth 
beneath : there is none other." 

1058. Where Tetragrammaton is the Ancient of Days. 
Hoa Ha-Elohim, that is the One, blessed be His Name 
for ever, and unto the Ages of the Ages. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
FURTHER REMARKS CONCERNING THE SUPERNAL MAN. 


1059. RABBI SCHIMEON spake, and said: Let us be- 
hold, The superiors are below, and the inferiors are 
above.” 


* Which is equivalent to the great magical precept of Hermes Trisme- 
gistus in the second clause of the Smaragdine Tablet: *' That which is 


Wee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 243 


1060. The superiors are below. That is the form of 
the Man which is the Universal Superior Conformation. 

1061. We have learned this which is written, ^ And 
the just man is the foundation, ISVD, Yesod, of the 
world," Prov. x. 25, because He comprehendeth the 
Hexad 1n one enumeration.* 

1062. And this is that which is written, Cant. v. 15: 
* His legs are as columns, SHSuH, Shesh, of the Number 
Six.” Τ 

1063. We have learned in the “ Book of Concealed 
Mystery " that in man are comprehended the Superior 
Crowns in general and in special; and that in man are 
comprehended the Inferior Crowns in special and in 
general. 

1064. The Superior Crowns in general (are compre- 
hended in) the figure of all those conformations, as hath 
been already said. 

1065. (The Superior Crowns) in special (are compre- 
hended) in the fingers of the hands, which are CHMSH 
KNGD CaMSu, Chamesh Ke-Neged Chamesh, Five over 
against (or opposed to, or chief above) Five.t 

1066. The Inferior Crowns (are comprehended in) the 
toes of the feet, which are special and general. 

1067. For the body is not seen with them, seeing 
they are extraneous to the body. And therefore they 


below is like that which is above, and that which is above is like that which 
is below, for the performance of the miracles of the one substance.” 

* It is not at first sight clear what is meant by this statement. Butifwe 
examine the passage closely, we shall see that the “just man" is taken for 
Microprosopus, who is the son, the “form of the man” ; “ comprehending the 
Hexad,” because he is composed of the six Sephiroth—Chesed, Geburah, 
Tiphereth, Netzach, Hod, and Yesod. 

+ The ordinary translation of this passage is: * His legs areas pillars of 
marble." SuSH may be translated either “marble” or “the Number Six,” 
according to the pointing. 

+ Compare “ Sepher Yetzirah,”’ cb.i. § 3: ‘‘ Tenare the restricting numera- 
tions (Sephiroth). The Number Ten (is that of the) fingers—Five as chief 
above (or over against, or opposed to) Five, CaMSi: KNGD CuMSn, and the 


pure Unity enthroned in Her strength in the Word of Renewal, and in the 
Word of Might." 


Ke 2 


244 KABBALAH. 


are not in the body, seeing the body hath receded from 
them. 

1068. For if so, what is this, Zach. xiv. 4: “ And His 
feet shall stand in that day?” ‘Truly the feet of the 
body, the Lords of Judgments to exercise vengeance. 

1069. And they are called the Lords of the Feet; and 
certain of them are powerful, and the Lords of the Judg- 
ments, who are below, adhere unto the inferior crowns. 

1070. We have learned that all those supernal con- 
formations which are in the Holy Body, in the Male and 
in the Female, which (arrangement of Male and Female) is 
the proper ordering (of the Form) of the man, are de- 
duced from themselves by turns, and that by turns they 
adhere each to its (order of deviation); and that by turns 
they flow down into themselves (4e, the duplicate Male 
and Female form). 

1071. Like as the blood floweth through the passages 
of the veins—now through one, now through another ; 
now hither, now thither; from one place into another place. 

1072. And those interior portions of the Body bind 
themselves together by turns until all the worlds are illu- 
minated, and receive benediction because of them. 

1073. We have learned that all those Crowns which 
are not comprehended in the Body are all far distant and 
impure, and pollute whom they are permitted—whoso- 
ever, namely, cometh near unto them so that he may 
learn anything from them. 

1074.* This have we learned. Wherefore, then, is 
there so great a desire for them among the Disciples of 
Wisdom? For no other reason than that they (the Crowns 
which are impure) should approach that Holy Body, 
and that thus perchance through them (the Disciples of 
Wisdom) they (the impure Crowns) may seek to be com- 
prehended in that Body. 

* This section apparently intends to inculcate the doctrine that it is the 


duty of the righteous to endeavour to improve not only the ungodly, but even 
the demons themselves. 


ae GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 245 


1075. But if thou sayest that if it be so, surely the 
Holy Angels also are not included in the comprehension 
of the Body. 

1076. Most assuredly it is not so in the least. For 
if, He being absent from them, there were Holy Ones 
without the conformative arrangement of the Body, surely 
(He being absent from them) they could neither (continue 
to) be holy, nor to subsist. 

1077. And nevertheless it is written, Dan. x. 6: 
“And his body like as THRSHISH, ZTarshish;" also, 
Ezek. x. 12: “ And their backs full of eyes;” also, 
Dan. ix. 21: “The man Gabriel.” All these passages 
refer to the analogy of the Man. 

1078. Those being accepted which exist not in the 
ordered arrangement of the Body ; for those are impure, 
and pollute him—namely, whosoever shall approach unto 
them. 

1079. Also, we have learned that these are found to 
proceed from the spirit of the left side, which is not 
mitigated in human form ; and they have gone out from 
the ordered arrangement of the Holy Body, neither do 
they adhere unto it. 

1080. And therefore are they all impure, and they 
wander to and fro, and fly through the world. 

IO8I. And iiey are entered into the mouth of the 
Great Abyss, so that they may adhere unto that former 
Judgment which had gone forth from the ordered 
arrangement of the Body, and which is called the Inferior 
Qain. 

1082. And they wander to and fro, and fly up and 
down, through the whole world, being carried abroad 
hither and thither; and they adhere not in the Syntagma 
of the Body. 

1083. And therefore are they without, and impure, 
among all the hosts above and below; like as it is 
written, Lev. xii. 46: “ And his habitation shall be 
without the camp." 


246 KABBALAH. 


1084. But from the Spirit which is called Abel, which 
hath been more mitigated in the Syntagma of the Holy 
Body, others go forth who have been more mitigated, 
and can adhere unto the body, but cannot completely be 
inherent within it. 

1085. They all hang in the air, and go forth from 
this genus of those Impure Ones, and hear whatsoever 
may be said above and below ; and concerning them they 
have knowledge who have spoken concerning them. 

1086. Also, this is the tradition in the * Book of 
Concealed Mystery.” When the Syntagma of the Super- 
nal Man had been mitigated as to the Holy Body, in 
Male and Female form, these two were conjoined together 
again for the third time.* 

1087. And the temperation of all things proceeded 
therefrom, and the superior and inferior worlds were 
mitigated. 

1088. And thenceforth the superior and inferior 
worlds are bound together under the form of the Holy 
Body, and the worlds are associated together, and cohere 
together, and have been made one Body.f 

1089. And since all things are one Body, the 
Schechinah Superior, the Schechinah Inferior—that 
Holy One, may He be blessed above! that Holy One, 
may He be blessed below !—hence is His Spirit drawn 
forth, and She entereth into the One Body, and in all 
things there appesreth nothing but the Unity. 

1090 ΩΡΝΥΡΗ, QDVSu, QDVSg, JHVH TZBAVTR ; 
Qadosh, Qadosh, Qadosh, Yod He Vau He Tzabaoth ; 
Holy, holy, holy, Tetragrammaton of the Hosts! the 
whole earth is full of Thy glory, for all things are Thy 
One Body. 

1001. We have learned that because the one hath 


* For their first conjunction produced Qain, the severe and evil judgment ; 
their second, Abel, the milder and weaker form whom Qain absorbs; but 
their third produces Seth, the equilibrium of the supernals and inferiors. 

+ “And they twain shall be one flesh." 


Bee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 200 


been tempered by the other, hence it is written, Cant. i. 

I: *We will make thee borders of gold with studs of 
silver." For judgment and mercy are connected together 
(otherwise, judgment is tempered through mercy), and 
She is mitigated by Him. 

1092. And therefore She ascendeth not itha Him, 
like as with the palms; one sex ariseth not without thie 
other. 

1093. And therefore have we learned by tradition 
that if any one in this world cutteth himself off from the 
race of mankind, he hereafter, when he quitteth this 
world, shall not enter into the Syntagma of mankind, 
which is called the Holy Body; but (shall enter) among 
those who are not called mankind, so that he shall go 
forth from the Syntagma of the Body. 

1094. We have learned in exotic tradition that this 
is the sense of “ We will make thee borders of gold with 
studs of silver" (Cant. i. r 1), that judgment is mitigated 
through mercy, so that there can be no judgment in which 
mercy is not found. 

1095. And therefore it is written, ibid. 10: “ Thy 
cheeks are beautiful in their outlines, and thy neck in 
pearls.” 

1096, * In outlines (or borders), 
* He will make thee borders of gold." 

1097. “In pearls," answering to that which is written : 
* With studs of silver." 

1098. “Thy neck" involveth the perfection of the 
Woman, ‘This is found to be the habitation of the Sanc- 
tuary above, but the Jerusalem below. 

1099. And all this is after that She is mitigated 
through the Male, and They twain are become one being, 
even the Syntagma of Truth. 

1100. What is this Truth? Wherein is found all 
Truth ? 

IIOI. Thus have we learned. If any one be called 
Adam, and his soul (Neschamah) goeth from him, and he 


22 


as it is written: 


248 KABBALAH. 


dieth, it is forbidden to leave him in his abode so that 
he should abide upon the earth. 

1102. On account of the honour of that Body 
wherein no corruption can appear. 

1103. For it is written, Ps. xlix. 13: “Man (Adam 
shall not abide in honour ;” that is, Adam, who is more 
worthy than all honour, shall not abide. 

1104. Wherefore ? Because if it were thus, he would 
be like unto the beasts (BHMVTu, Behemoth) which 
perish. 

1105. In what manner is it with the beast? He is 
not in the race of Adam, neither is he able to receive the 
Holy Spirit (RVCHA QDISHA), for thus also would he 
be like unto the beast were his body without the Spirit, 
when at the same time that body (of Ais), which is the 
most honourable of all (bodies, seeing it is the image of 
the Supernal), is not meet to be associated with those 
things which are ignominious. 

1106. Also we have learned in the * Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery,” that were any one permitted to remain 
in any such (image of the) Holy Body, and yet without 
the Spirit (uacha), there would be a void in the Body 
of the World. 

1107. For assuredly, therefore, it could not be per- 
mitted unto him that he should abide in the holy place, 
in that earth wherein justice abideth. (Otherwise: Under 
the command of the Holy Crown, Aether, of the King, 
Microprosopus, in the earth, concerning which it is 
written, Isa. i. 21, * Justice abideth in Her.") 

1108.* Since that venerable Body is the Form of the 
King; but if it were thus permitted to remain, then it 
would be counted as one of the beasts. (Otherwise: 
Since this venerable Body is called the Form of the King, 
and if it were thus left abiding, it would be like as the 


* These sections are going on the idea of the Body remaining alive when 


the Divine Spirit has been withdrawn therefrom ; that is, were it possible 
or it to be so. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 249 


beast.) Therefore is it said, ** Like unto the beasts which 
perish.” 

1109. We have learned this which is written, Gen. 
vi. 2: * And the sons of the Elohim beheld the daughters 
of Adam.” These (sons of the Elohim) are they who were 
withdrawn, and who fell into the mouth of the Great 
Abyss.* 

MEM “ine daughters of Adam.” (Here it is to be 
noted that it is written HADM, Ha-Adam, the initial 
being demonstrative and emphatic, signifying) of that 
especial Adam. 

IIII. And it is written: “ And they came in unto 
them . . . the same were mighty men, who were from 
the Earth," &c. From that place, namely, which is called 
the earth, like as the tradition is concerning the phrase 
IMI OVLM, Femi Olahm, the day of the world. 

III2. The impurities f of the Name. From them 
have gone forth the Spirits, RVCHIN, Ruachin, and the 
Demons, SHDIN, Shedin, into the world, so that they 
may adhere unto the wicked. 

1113. “There were HNPILIM, Ha-Nephilim, Giants, 
BARTZ, Be-Aretz, in the earth;” for the restraining of 
those who were left, who existed not in the earth. 

1114. Those giants are OZA, Auza, and OZAL, 
Auzael, who were in the earth, the sons of the Elohim 
were not in the earth. And thisisan Arcanum, and all 
these things are said. 

IIIS. It is written, Gen. vi. 6: “And it repented 
Tetragrammaton that He had formed Adam in the 
earth;" i.e., for the restriction of the Supernal Adam, 
who is not in the earth. 

IIIÓ. “And it repented Tetragrammaton;” this is 
said concerning Microprosopus. 

1117. “ And He was grieved about His heart ;” it is 

* See ante, § 1048. 


+ Knorr Von Rosenroth translates this word ANSuI, Aneshi; Viri, “ men ;" 
but I think “impurities ” preferable. 


250 KABBALAH. 


not written, VIOTZB, Va-Yautzeb, and He affected with 
grief ; but VITHOTZB, Va- Yethautzeb, and He was touched 
with grief; i.e., He was affected with grief from whom 
the matter depended, for the restriction of Him who 
was not touched with grief. 

IIIS. “ About His heart." It is not written, “ with- 
in His heart," but “about His heart"; like as when any 
man is afflicted with grief, and mourneth before his 
Lord; for herein it is referred unto the heart of all 
hearts. 

IIIO. And Tetragrammaton said: “ I will destroy the 
Adam whom I have created, from offthe face of HADMH, 
Ha-Adamah the Earth," &c., for the restriction* of the 
Adam, who is supernal. 

1120. And if thou sayest that the Inferior Adam is 
alone to be understood, it 1s to be known that these can- 
not altogether be opposed, seeing that the one existeth 
not without the other. 

1121. And unless Chokmah, Wisdom, could be hidden 
from all, all things could be conformed like as from the 
beginning. 

1122. Hence it is said, Prov. viii. 12: “ ANI CHKMH, 
Ani Chokmah, I, Wisdom, have dwelt with Prudence ; ” 
read it not SHKNTHI, SAekenethi, Y have dwelt; but 
SHIKNTuI, Shikeneth-i, My Schechinah or My Presence. 

1123. And unless Adam were thus, the world could 
not consist; like as it is written, Prov. 11. 19: “ Tetra- 
grammation in Chokmah hath founded the earth, IHVH 
BCaKMH ISD ARTZ, Tetragrammaton Be-Chokmah Yesed 
Aretz. 

1124. Also it is written, Gen. vi. 8: “ And Noah 
found grace in the eyes of Tetragrammaton." 

II25. Also we have learned that all brains depend 
from this brain (supernal). 

1126. And Chokmah, Wisdom, also is a general 
name, but this concealed Wisdom corroborateth and con- 


* Or counterbalancing. 


ΟΕ ΓΕ HOLY ASSEMBLY. 25I 


formeth the form of the Man, so that He may abide in 
his place. 

1127, Like as it is written, Eccl. vii. 19 : “ Wisdom 
is a strength to a wise man more than ten rulers which 
are in a city ;" which (¢en) are the integral conformation 
of the man. 

II28. Adam, truly, is the interior conformation, 
wherein consisteth the RVCu, Ruach, Spirit ; like as it is 
said, 1 Sam. xvi. 6: * Because Adam seeth according to 
the eyes, but Tetragrammaton seeth according to the 
heart," which is within the interior parts. 

1129. And in that formation appeareth the true per- 
fection of all things, which existeth above the "Throne. 
Like as it is written : “And the appearance as the like- 
ness of Adam upon it from above" (Ezek. i. 26). 

1130. Also it is written, Dan. vii. 13: “ And, be- 
hold, there came with the clouds of heaven one like unto 
a son of man, and even unto the Ancient of Days he 
came, and they made Him approach unto Him." 


CHAPTER XLV.* 
CONCLUSION. 


1131. HEREUNTO are the concealed words, and the 
more secret meaning (of them hath been set forth in many 
places). Blessed is his portion who hath known and be- 
held them, and who erreth not therein. 

1132. Because these words are not given forth save 
unto the Lords of Lords and the Reapers of the Field, 
who have both entered into and departed therefrom. 


* [tis worthy of note that the total number of chapters in the “ Idra Rabba 
Qadisha” is 45, which is equal to MH, Mah, the concealed name of Yetzirah. 
(See Introduction concerning the Four Worlds. ) 


252 KABBALAH. 


1133. Like as it is written, Hosea xiv, 9: “ For 
the paths of Tetragrammaton are right, and the just 
shall walk in them, but transgressors shall fall 
therein,” 

1134. This have we learned. Rabbi Schimeon wept, 
and lifted up his voice and said: “If on account of our 
words which be here revealed, the Companions are to be 
concealed in the Conclave of the world to come, and are 
to be taken away from this world, it is justly and rightly 
done, in order that they may not reveal (these secrets) unto 
one of the children of this world." 

1135. Again he said: “ I return unto myself. For 
truly I have revealed (these secrets) before the Ancient of 
the Ancient Ones, the Concealed One with all Conceal- 
ments; but not for mine own glory, not for the glory of 
the house of my father, not for the glory of these my 
Companions, have I done (this thing). 

1136. * But in order that they might not err in His 
paths, nor that they might enter into the portals of His 
Palace to be made ashamed, nor that they might be 
destroyed for their error. Blessed be my portion with 
them in the world to come.” 

1137. We have learned that before the companions 
departed from this Assembly, Rabbi Yosi, Rabbi 
Chizqiah, and Rabbi Yisa died. 

1138. And the companions beheld that the holy 
angels carried them away into that veil expanded above. 
And Rabbi Schimeon spake a certain word, and fell 
upon his face. 

1139. Rabbi Schimeon cried aloud end said: 
* Wherefore is this? Because a certain decree hath 
been decreed against us to punish us, seeing that 
through us that hath been revealed which had not been 
revealed hitherto, from that day wherein Moses stood 
upon the mountain of Sinai. 

1140. ‘Like as it is written, Exod. xxxiv. 28: 
And he was there with Tetragrammaton forty days 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 253 


and forty nights. Why then do I tarry here, if there- 
for I am to be punished ?” 

1141. And a Voice was heard which spake, and said : 
** Blessed art thou, Rabbi Schimeon, and blessed is thy 
portion, and that of those companions who are with 
thee; for unto ye hath that been revealed which is not 
revealed unto the whole superna! host. 

1142. “ But come, behold. It is written, Josh. vi. 
26: ‘ And in his firstborn son shall he establish it, and 
in his youngest son shall he set up the gates thereof ; 
much more than in this instance also are these taken 
away, seeing that with most severe and vehement study 
have they applied their souls (NPSHTHHVN, Nephe- 
schethhun) hereunto at this time. 

1143. “ Blessed is their portion, for assuredly thev 
have been taken away in perfection; and such were not 
those who were before them.” 

1144. Wherefore died they? We have learned this, 
When thus far these words were revealed, the Supernals 
and Inferiors of those Chariots were disturbed, and the 
Voice which revealed the Ancient Word below resounded 
through two hundred and fifty worlds. 

1145. And before that those (three Rabbis) could 
recollect their souls, NSHMTHITHV, .Neschamathiyehu, 
among those words (of that Voice) their souls had gone 
forth with a kiss * ; and were joined unto that expanded 
veil, and the Supernal Angels carried them away. 

1146. But wherefore those? Because they had 
entered in, and had not gone forth alternately, before 
this time. But all the others had entered in, and had 
gone forth. 

1147. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: ‘ How 


* The palace which is situate in the secret and most elevated part of 
heaven is called the Palace of Love. There dwells the Heavenly King— 
blessed be He !—with the holy souls, andis united with them with a loving 
kiss. This kiss is the union of the soul with the substance from which it 
emanated. 


254 KABBALAH. 


blessed is the portion of those three, and therefore also 
blessed is our portion !” 

1148. And a second time that Voice pealed forth 
and said, Deut. iv. 4: ^ But ye that did cleave unto 
Tetragrammaton, your God, are alive every one of you 
this day.” 

1149. They arose, and behold there was no place 
whence a fragrance went not forth. 

1150. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: ‘‘ From this 
I perceive that the world receiveth blessing on account 
of us.” 

1151. And the faces of them all shone, so that men 
could not look upon them. 

1152. We have learned that there were ten (Rabbis) 
entered into (the Assembly), and that seven came forth. 

1153. And Rabbi Schimeon rejoiced, and Rabbi Abba 
was sad. 

1154. On a certain day Rabbi Schimeon sat, and 
Rabbi Abba with him. Rabbi Schimeon spake a certain 
word. 

1155. And they saw those three (Rabbis) who had died, 
and with them were most beautiful angels, who were 
showing unto them the supernal treasures and conclaves, 
on account of their great dignity. 

1156. And they were entering into a mountain of 
pure balm ; and the soul of Rabbi Abba was comforted. 

1157. We have learned that after that day the com- 
panions did not quit the house of Rabbi Schimeon. 

1158. And when Rabbi Schimeon revealed the Ar- 
cana, there were found none present there save those 
(companions). 

1159. And Rabbi Schimeon called them the seven 
eyes of Tetragrammaton, like as it is written, Zach. iii. 9: 
* These are the seven eyes of Tetragrammaton.” And 
this was said concerning us.* 


* Meaning, I suppose, that Rabbi Abba adds this by way of note to the 
text. 


Wee GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 295 


1160. Rabbi Abba spake and said: * We six are lights 
which shine forth from a seventh (light); thou art the 
seventh light (the origin of) us all. 

1161. * For assuredly there is no stability in those 
six, save (what they derive) from the seventh. For all 
things depend from the seventh. 

1162. Rabbi Yehudah called him * the Sabbath of all 
the six (.Kabbi). i 

1163. Like as it is written: ‘“‘The Sabbath for Tetra- 
grammaton, holy unto Tetragrammaton.” 

1164. What is the Sabbath? Holy unto Tetra- 
grammaton ; so also Rabbi Schimeon is, like the Sabbath, 
holy unto Tetragrammaton. 

1165. Rabbi Schimeon said: “It is strange that he 
who is girded about the loins, and clothed with a heavy 
garment, was not found in the place of our conclave 
when those holy matters were revealed ! 7 

1166. Meanwhile, Elihu entered, and three beams of 
light shone in his countenance. 

1167. Rabbi Schimeon said unto him: “ Why was it 
that he was not present (otherwise, Why was not my 
lord present) in the sculptured square of his Lord in the 
nuptial day ? " 

1168. He answered unto him: “Through thy life, 
Rabbi, seven were chosen before Him, the Holy One— 
may He be blessed !—(otherwise, seven days are prostrate 
before the Blessed God) all those who could come and 
abide with Him, before that ye could enter into the 
House of Conclave. 

1169. “And I prayed that I might come among the 
others, and I wished to adhere unto His shoulders (other- 
wise, And I asked Him that it might be permitted me 
to enter in, but He constrained my shoulders), and I 
could not. 

* Him: £e, Rabbi Schimeon Ben Yochai, who was chief among the seven 


sarviving Rabbis, like the Sabbath among the days of the week. 
T Elihu, who now enters. 


256 KABBALAH. 


1170. * For in that day was I sent that I might 
perform miracles for Rav Hamenuna the elder and his 
companions, who had been taken away into the palace 
(otherwise: into the prison) of the King. 

1171. * And I performed a miracle for them, and 
cast down the King's rampart (otherwise: I cast down the 
wall of the royal palace for them), with whose chains 
they were bound; so that (their) forty-five warders were 
kept back. 

1172. “ And I led forth Rav Hamenuna and his 
companions, and brought them up unto the valley of 
Aunu; and they have been set free. 

1173. “And I have given unto them bread and 
water, seeing they had not eaten for three days. 

1174. * And all the day I quitted them not. 

1175. * And when I returned (Aither), I found the 
Veil expanded, which all these Columns* upheld; and, 
three of the Companions (had ascended) above it. 

1176. ‘‘ And I spake unto them, and they answered : 
* 'This is the portion of God the most Holy One—may He 
be blessed !—from the nuptials f of Rabbi Schimeon and 
his companions.’ 

1177. * Blessed art thou, Rabbi Schimeon, and 
blessed is thy portion, and that of those companions who 
are sitting in thy presence. 

1178. * How many paths are prepared for ye in the 
world to come! how many lights of lights are prepared 
that they may enlighten ye! 

1179. * And come, behold! Therefore on this day 
there are bound together for thee fifty crowns for Rabbi 
Benchas Ben Yair, thy father-in-law, and I walk with him. 

1180. * And all those are rivers of the mountains of 
pure balm, for assuredly his place and lot is chosen 
(otherwise: and I saw that he had, &c.). 


* The columns of the Sephiroth. 
+ This term is occasionally used in a mystical sense to signify the 
acquisition of divine wisdom. 


THE GREATER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 257 


1181. (Rabbi Schimeon) said unto him: “ Are there- 
fore the just united by the Union of the Diadems more 
on the days of the New Moon, of the feasts, and of the 
Sabbaths, than on any other days?” 

1182. He answered unto him: ‘Most certainly; 
also all those who are without. Like as it is written, 
Isa. lxvi. 23 : ‘ And it shall come to pass that from one 
new moon to another, and from one sabbath unto 
another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith 
Tetragrammaton.' 

1183. “ If those come, how much more the just! 

1184. ‘‘ Wherefore from one new moon unto another ? 
Because the patriarchs surround the Holy Chariot. 

1185. * And from one Sabbath unto another Sabbath, 
because the seventh day is surrounded by all the other 
six days. 

1186. “Like as it is written: ‘And the Elohim 
blessed the seventh day,’ &c. 

1187. “ And thou, Rabbi Schimeon, art the seventh : 
thou shalt be the chief; and thou shalt be more crowned 
and sanctified than all. 

1188. ‘ And with three most delicious feasts of the 
seventh day shall the just be entertained because of thee 
in the world to come. 

1189. “ Also it is written, Isa. lvii. 13: ‘Thou 
shalt call the sabbath a delight, the holy of Tetragram- 
maton, honourable.’ 

1190. ‘‘ Who is He, the Holy One of Tetragramma- 
ton? This is Rabbi Schimeon Ben Yochai, who is 
called very glorious (both) in this world and in (the 
world) to come.” 


Hereunto is the Greater Holy Assembly. 


HADRA ZVTA QDISHA 


(HA IDRA ZUTA QADISHA); 


OR, 


THEE CESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 


CHAPTER I. 
WHICH CONTAINETH THE INTRODUCTION. 


I. TRADITION.—On that day on which the Companions 
were assembled together in the house of Rabbi Schimeon, 
and on which he had arranged his affairs because he was 
about to depart from the world, before him were 
Rabbi Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and the rest of 
the Companions; and the house was full. 

2. Therefore lifting up his eyes, Rabbi Schimeon saw 
that the house was full. And Rabbi Schimeon wept, 
saying: The second time when I was sick, and Rabbi 
Benchas Ben Yair was in my presence, and until I had 
chosen my place, life hath been prolonged unto me even 
until now. 

3. * When I was restored, fire surrounded (my habi- 
tation) which hitherto hath never ceased, neither did 
any man enter in unto me without permission. 

4. '' But now I see that it is taken away, and that 
the house is filled." 

5. Whilst they were sitting down, Rabbi Schimeon, 

7 S 


260 KABBALAKH. 


opening his eyes, beheld a certain vision, and lo! fire 
surrounded the house! 

6. Therefore all (the others) went forth, and Rabbi 
Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba remained; but the 
other Companions sat without. 

7. Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar his son: 
* Go forth, and see whether Rabbi Yitzchaq be present, 
for whom I have made myself surety. 

8. “ And say thou unto him that he dispose his affairs, 
and that he may sit down with me. Blessed is his 
portion." 

9. Rabbi Schimeon arose and again sat down; and 
he laughed aloud, and rejoicing, said: * Where are the 
Companions ? " 

IO. Rabbi Eleazar arose and introduced them, and 
E. sat down in his presence. 

. Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands and prayed 
a m and was joyful. 

12. And he said: * Let those ιβ ας who were 
in the former Conclave* assemble here.” 

13. Therefore, all the others having gone forth, there 
remained Rabbi Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and 
Rabbi Yehudah, and Rabbi Yosi Bar Yoqeb, and Rabbi 
Chiya. 

14. In the meantime Rabbi Yitzchaq entered,” to 
whom Rabbi Schimeon said: ‘ How excellent is thy 
lot! How much Joy is this day stored up for thee! " 

15. Rabbi Abba sat down behind his (i.e., Rabbi 
Schimeon’s) back, and Rabbi Eleazar before him (?.e., Rabbi 
Schimeon). 

16. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: ‘Surely now 
is the time of benevolence, and I desire to enter without 
confusion into the world to come. 

17. “ And verily these sacred things, which hereunto 
have never been revealed, I desire to reveal before the 
Schekhinah ; 

* That is, who had formed part of the Greater Holy Assembly. 


mee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 261 


18. “ Lest they should say that I have kept back any- 
thing, and that I have been taken away from the world; 
for even until now these things have been concealed in 
my heart, so that having entered into these very matters 
I may be with them in the world to come. 

19. “ But this is my arrangement of you; let Rabbi 
Abba write, and let Rabbi Eleazar my son speak openly ; 
but let the rest of the Companions in silence meditate in 
their heart.” 

20. Rabbi Abba arose from his seat behind him, and 
Rabbi Eleazar his son sat down. 

21. He said unto him, “ Arise, O my son, for another 
shall sit in that seat; ” and Rabbi Eleazar arose. 

22. Rabbi Schimeon covered himself and sat down; 
and he commenced, and said Ps, cxv. 17: ‘“‘ The dead 
shall not praise IH, Yah, nor all they who go down into 
silence ! 

23. “ ‘The dead shall not praise Yah ;’ so it is certain 
that it is assuredly those who are called dead; for He, 
God, the most Holy One—may He be blessed !—is called 
the Living One, and is Himself commemorated among 
those who are called living, and not with those who are 
called dead. 

24. “ And the end of this text runneth thus: ‘ Nor 
all they who go down into silence;' for all they who go 
down into silence remain in Gehenna. 

25. “There is another reason appertaining to those 
who are called living, for God the most Holy One—may 
He be blessed !—desireth their glory.” 

26. Rabbi Schimeon said: “ How different is this 
occasion from that of the former conclave! For into a 
certain conclave * came He, the most Holy and Blessed 
God, and His Chariot. 

27. “ Now verily He, the Holy One, is here—may He 

* Meaning that the Greater Holy Assembly had been as it were the 


reflection of the conclave of the Sephiroth above. The word used for 
“chariot "' is not Mercavah, but Lethikh. - 


262 KABBALAH. 


be blessed—and He hath approached with those Just 
who are in the Garden of Eden,* which did not.occur in 
the former conclave. 

28. * And God, the Most Holy One—may He be 
blessed—more promoteth the glory of the Just than His 
own glory. 

29. * As it is written concerning Jeroboam, who sacri- 
ficed unto and served other gods, and yet God, the Most 
Holy One—may He be blessed !—waited for him. 

30. '' But because he stretched forth his hand against 
Iddo the prophet, his hand became withered. 

31. “For it is written, 1 Kings xin. 4: And ΜΠ 
hand became withered, &c.' Here it is not written that 
it was because he served other gods, but because he 
extended his hand against Iddo the prophet, &c. 

32. * Now, therefore, God the Most Holy One—may 
He be blessed !—promoteth their glory (i.e., that of the 
Just), and they all come with Him.” 

33. He said: “ Verily, Rav Hamenuna the elder is 
here, and around him are seventy Just represented in his 
circle, of whom certain shine with the splendour of the 
Ancient and Most Holy One, the Concealed with all 
Concealments. 

33.1 “He, I say, cometh, in order that with joy he 
may hear those words which I shall speak." 

34. And when he had sat down he said: “ Assuredly 
here a seat hath been set aside for Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair.” 

35. The companions who were there trembled greatly, 
and thev arose, and sat down in the lowest part of the 
house; but Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Abba (still sat) 
before Rabbi Schimeon. 

36. Rabbi Schimeon said: * In the former Assembly 
we acted thus, namely, that all the companions spoke, and 
I also with them, by turns. 


* Le. The Paradise above. 
+ In the original both this and the foregoing section, apparently by an 
oversight, have the number 33 attached to them. 


tie LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 263 


37. “Now I shall speak alone, and let all hear my 
words, superiors and inferiors; blessed be my portion 
this day!” 

38. Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. vii. 10: 
“(Iam my beloved’s, and his desire is towards me.’ 

39. “ As long as I have been bound unto this world in 
one link with God, the Most Holy One—may he be 
blessed !—have I been bound, and therefore now is His 
desire towards me. 

40. “For He Himself and His whole holy company 
come, so that with joy they may hear the concealed words, 
and the praise of Him, the Most Holy Ancient One, the 
Concealed with all Concealments. 

41. “ And Heseparateth Himself ever more and more ; 
He is separated from all things, neither yet doth He 
altogether separate Himself, seeing that unto Himself all 
things adhere, and that He Himself adhereth unto all ; 
HVA, Hoa, He Himself is all; He the Most Holy Ancient 
of all Ancients, the Concealed with all Concealments. 

42. * He hath been formed, and yet as it were He 
hath not been formed. He hath been conformed, so that 
He may sustain all things; yetis He not formed, seeing 
that He is not discovered. 

43. “When He is conformed He produceth nine Lights, 
which shine forth from Him, from His conformation. 

44. “ And from Himself those Lights shine forth, and 
they emit flames, and they rush forth and are extended on 
every side, like as from an elevated lantern the rays of 
light stream down on every side. 

45. “And those rays of light,* which are extended, 
when any one draweth near unto them, so that they may 
be examined, are not found, and there is only the lantern 
alone. 

46. “So also is He the Most Holy and Ancient One: 
He is that highest Light concealed with all concealments, 


* Carrying on the simile of the lantern and its rays. 


264 KABBALAKH. 


and He is not found; those rays * (proceeding from Him) 
being excepted, which are extended, which are revealed, 
and which are hidden. 

47. * And they are called the Holy Name, and there- 
fore are all things One. 

48. ** Which truly our companions have said in former 
books, that certain paths have been created by the Most 
Holy Ancient One, who is revealed through them collec- 
tively and severally ; since they are the conformations of 
the Most Holy Ancient One, concerning them now there 
is not time for examination. 

49. *I have spoken concerning them in the Holy 
Assembly, and I have beheld that which before I did not 
understand in such a manner, and I have hidden the 
matter in my heart. 

50. * But now I alone will describe these things before 
the Holy King, and all those assuredly just men who 
have assembled to hear these words." n 


CHAPTER II. 


CONCERNING THE SKULL OF THE ANCIENT ONE, AND CON- 
CERNING HIS BRAIN; AND CONCERNING THE THREE 
HEADS, AND THE HAIR, AND THE DISCRIMINATORY 
PATHS. 


51. THE skull of the White Head hath not beginning, 
but its end is the convexity of its joining together, which 
is extended, and shineth. 

52. And from it the just shall inherit four hundred f 
desirable worlds in the world to come. 

53. And from this convexity of the joining together 

* The Sephiroth. 


T Which is the number of Tu, the last letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, 
which includes the symbology of the cross. 


ae ESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 265 


of this White Skull daily distilleth a dew into Micropro- 
sopus, into that place which is called Heaven; and in 
that very place shall the dead be raised to life in the 
time to come. 

54. Like as it is written, Gen. xxvi. 27: “ And 
Elohim shall give thee from the dew of heaven." 

55. And His head is filled with that dew, and all the 
place of the apple-trees distilleth therewith. 

56. He, the Most Holy Ancient One, is hidden and 
concealed, and in that Skull is the Supernal Wisdom 
concealed, who is found and who is not found. 

57. For assuredly in Him, the Ancient One, nothing 
is revealed save the Head alone, seeing that that Head is 
itself the Head of all heads. 

58. The beginning of that Supernal Wisdom which 
also is itself the Head, is hidden therein, and is called 
the Supernal Brain, the Hidden Brain, the Tranquil and 
Calm Brain; neither doth any man know it, save He 
Himself, 

59. Three Heads have been formed forth, one within 
the other, and the other above the other. 

6ο. One Head is the Concealed Wisdom, which 18 
covered and is not disclosed. 

61. And this Hidden Wisdom is the Head of all 
things, and the Head of the remaining Wisdoms. 

62. The Supernal Head is the Most Holy Ancient 
One, the Concealed with all Concealments. 

63. The Head of all Heads, the Head which is not a 
Head *—namely, that which is i» that Head—neither 
knows nor is known, because it cannot be comprehended 
either by Wisdom or Understanding. 

64. And therefore is it read, Num. xxiv. 11: “Fly 
thee τη Hy place ;" and Ezek. i 14. The Chatoth, 


living creatures, are said to run forth and return. 


* That 16 to say, which will hardly admit even of so vague a definition, 
seeing it is the Indefinite Absolute in Kether. 


266 KABBALAKH. 


65. And therefore is the Most Holy Ancient One 
called AIN, Ain, the Negatively Existent; seeing that 
back from Him dependeth the AIN, the Negative Exist- 
ence.* 

66. But all those hairs and all those locks depend 
from the Hidden Brain. 

67. And all are calm (otherwise, are disposed) in the 
Equilibrium; neither in any manner is the neck seen 
(1.6., because of the locks which overshadow it). 

68. Because He the Most Holy Ancient One is in 
an unvarying condition of joy, neither changeth He from 
mercy for ever. 

69. But in the thirteen measurements T of mercies is 
He found, because that Wisdom hidden in Him is divided 
into three { paths in a quaternary, and He Himself the 
Ancient One comprehendeth them, and through them 
doth He reign over all things. 

70. One (path) which shineth in the midst of the 
hairs going forth from the Skull, is that path by whose 
light the just are led into the world to come. 

71. Like as it is written, Prov. iv. 18: “And the 
path of the just shineth as the light.” 

72, And concerning this it is written, Isa. lviii. 14: 
“Then shalt thou delight thyself in Tetragramma- 
ton." 


* We must be most careful not to misapprehend the meaning intended to 
be conveyed in this passage. Kether, the Ancient One, Macroprosopus, is 
not in the more restricted sense of the first Sephira, the AIN, but that that 
idea links back from Him must be manifest on consideration. Yet even He, 
the Vast Countenance, is hidden and concealed ; how much more, then, the 
AIN! From Negative to Positive, through Potential Existence, eternally 
vibrates the Divine Absolute of the Hidden Unity of processional form masked 
in the Eternal Abyss of the Unknowable, the synthetical hieroglyph of an 
illimitable pastless futureless Present. To the uttermost bounds of space 
rushes the Voice of Ages, unheard save in the concentrated unity of the 
thought-formulated Abstract, and eternally that Voice formulates a Word 
which is glyphed in the vast ocean of limitless life. 

+ The thirteen conformations of the beard of Macroprosopus. 

X The Trinity completed by the Quaternary. 


σσ HOLY ASSEMBLY. 267 


73. And from that path * are all the other paths 
illuminated which depend from Microprosopus. 

74. He the Eternal Ancient of the Ancient Ones is 
the highest Crown among the Supernals, wherewith all 
Diadems and Crowns are crowned. 

75. And from Him are all the Lights illuminated, and 
they flash forth flames, and shine. 

76. But He verily is the Supreme Light, which is 
hidden, which is not known. 

77. And all the other Lights are kindled by Him, and 
derive (their) splendour (from him). 

78. He the Most Holy Ancient One is found to have 
three heads, which are contained in the one Head.T, 

79. And He Himself is that only highest supreme 
Head. 

80. And since He the Most Holy Ancient One is thus 
symbolized in the Triad, hence all the other Lights 
which shine are included in Triads. 

81. Moreover, the Most Holy Ancient One is also 
symbolized by the Duad. 

82. And the division of the Ancient One in the Duad 


* Kether, the first Sephira, from which all the other Sephiroth proceed, 
namely, those which are summed up in the Tetragrammaton. 

T I.e., His manifestation is triune. 

t This refers to the Triads in the Sephiroth, when the Autz Chaiim is 
formed. (See Introduction.) It will be found that in this arrangement of the 
ten Sephiroth there are ten Triads, viz. : 

(1) Kether, Chokmah, Dinah. 

(2) Chesed, Geburah, Tiphereth. 

(3) Netzach, Hod, Yesod. 

(4) Chokmah, Chesed, Netzach. 

(5) Tipbereth, Yesod, Malkuth. 

(6) Binah, Geburah, Hod. 

(7) Chokmah, Tiphereth, Hod. 

(8) Binah, Tiphereth, Netzach. 

(9) Chesed, Tiphereth, Hod. 

(10) Geburah, Tiphereth, Netzach. 

Wherein Kether and Malkuth are each repeated once; Chokmah, Dinabh, 
Chesed, and Geburah, thrice ; Tiphereth, six times , Netzach and Hod each 
four times ; and Yesod twice. 


268 KABBALAH. 


is so that the (one form is) the Highest Crown of all the 
Supernals, the Head of all Heads. 

83. And (the other is) that superior Head, and It is 
not known. 

84. So also all the remaining Lights are mystically 
divided into Duads. 

85. Furthermore, the Most Holy Ancient One is 
symbolized and concealed under the conception of the 
Unity, for He himself is One, and all things are One. 

86. And thus all the other Lights are sanctified, are 
restricted, and are bound together in the Unity or 
Monad, and are One; and all things are HVA, Hoa, 
Himself. 


CHAPTER III. 


CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF THE MOST HOLY 
ANCIENT ONE. 


87. THE Forehead, which is uncovered in the Most 
Holy Ancient One, is called Grace. 

88. For that Supernal Head concealed in the Higher, 
which no man hath known, expandeth a certain external 
manifestation, beautiful and gracious, which is compre- 
hended in the Forehead. 

89. And since He Himself is the grace of all gra- 
ciousness; hence He assumeth the conformation of the 
Forehead, which is disclosed in the most intense light 
(otherwise, hath a formation in the figure of a leaf). 

90. And when It is disclosed, the grace of all gracious- 
ness is found in all worlds. 

9I. And all the prayers of the Inferiors are accepted ; 
and the countenance of Microprosopus is illuminated, and 
all things are found to exist in mercy. 

92. And since (through this) all judgments are hidden 


we δα OLY ASSEMBLY. 269 


and subjected, hence in the Sabbath, in the time of the 
afternoon prayers, in which all judgments are excited, 
that Forehead is disclosed. 

93. And all the judgments are turned aside, and 
mercies are found. 

94. And therefore is the Sabbath found without 
judgment, as well that which is above as that which 
is below; also the fire of Gehenna is restrained in its 
place, and the transgressors are at rest. 

95. And therefore is the Spirit, NSHMTH, of Joy 
added on the Sabbath. 

96. And it behoveth man to rejoice with three feasts 
on the Sabbath ; for all truth, and the whole system of 
true faith, is found therein (1.ε., in the Sabbath). 

97. And it behoveth man to prepare the table, that 
he may eat in the three feasts of true faith, and rejoice 
in them.* 

98. Rabbi Schimeon said : “ I attest concerning myself, 
before all these who are here present, that through all 
my days I have not omitted these three feasts, and that 
because of them I have not been compelled to fast on the 
Sabbath. 

99. “ Furthermore, also on other days I have not been 
compelled (to fast), much less on the Sabbath, for he who 
rightly acteth concerning these (feasts) is the adept of 
perfect truth. 

100. “ The first feast is that of the Great Mother ; 
the second that of the Holy King; and the third that of 
the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with ali Con- 
cealments.] 

IOI. “ And in this world, who can thoroughly follow 
out, through them, those paths ? 


* In many of the ancient mysteries a feast was part of the ceremony, 
analogous to our Eucharist. | Verbum sapientibus. 

T That is, the greatest triad of the Sephiroth, the Crown, King, and 
Queen ; which finds a parallel in the Osiris, Isis, and Horus ; the Axieros, 
Axiochersos, and Axiochersa of Lemnos and Samothrace, &c., &c. 


270 KABBALAH 


102. “If this RTZVN, Ratzon, Grace, be revealed, all 
those judgments are enlightened, and are diverted from 
their concentrated rigour. 

103. “The conformation of Him, the Most Holy 
Ancient One, is instituted through one form, which is the 
ideal Syntagma of all forms. 

104. “The same is the Concealed Supernal Wisdom, 
the synthesis of all the rest. 

105. * And this is called ODN, Eden, or the supernal 
Paradise, concealed with all occultations. 

106. * And it is the Brain of the Most Holy Ancient 
One, and that Brain is expanded on every side. 

107. “ Therefore is it extended into Eden, or another 
Paradise,* and from this is Eden or Paradise formed 
forth. 

IO8. *And when this Head, which is concealed in 
the Head of the Ancient One, which is not known, ex- 
tendeth a certain frontal formation, which is formed for 
brilliance, then flasheth forth the Lightning of His Brain. 

10g. “And it is formed forth and illuminated with 
many Lights. 

IIO. * And it produceth and designeth (a certain 
effect) in this Light (otherwise, in this opening). in this 
Forehead, whereon is inscribed a certain Light, which is 
called ΚΤΖΥΝ, Ratzon, Grace. 

III. * And that Grace is extended backward into the 
beard, even unto that place where it can remain in the 
beard, and it is called the Supernal, CHSD, Chesed, Mercy. 

112. “And when this Grace is uncovered, all the 
Lords of Judgment behold It, and are turned aside.” 


* Described in other places as the Supernal Eden and the Inferior Eden. 


Ge LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 27I 


CHAPTER IV. 


CONCERNING THE EYES OF THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT ONE. 


113. THE eyes of the Head of the Most Holy Ancient 
One are two in one,* equal, which ever watch, and sleep 
not. 

114. Like as it is written, Ps. cxxi. 4: “ The Keeper 
of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleepeth," &c.— namely, 
of Israel the holy. 

115. And therefore are there no eyebrows nor eye- 
lashes unto His eyes. 

II6. This Brain is conformed and illuminated with 
three supernal white brilliances. 

117. With this white brilliance are the eyes of Micro- 
prosopus bathed. 

118. As it is written, Cant. v. 12: “ Washed with 
milk," flowing down from the fulness of that primal white 
brilliance. 

119. And with the remaining white brilliances are the 
other lights cleansed and purified. 

120. The Brain is called the Fountain of Benevolence, 
the fountain wherein all blessings are found. 

121. And since this Brain radiateth into the three 
white brilliances of the eye (of Microprosopus), hence is 
that called the “ good eye," concerning which it is said, 
Prov. xxii. ο: “ It shall be blessed,” or rather that from 
it dependeth blessing. 

122. For through the Brain are manifested the white 
brilliances of the eye. 

123. And when this eye looketh upon Microprosopus, 
all the worlds are (in a state of) happiness. 


* The Duad equated in the Monad. Compare what I have previously 
remarked concerning the profile symbolism of Macroprosopus. 


272 KABBALAH. 


124. This isthe right eye. The inferior eyes are right 
and left, two in duplicate colour. 

125. In the * Book of Concealed Mystery " have we 
taught that there is a Superior Yod, an Inferior Yod; a 
Superior He, an Inferior He ; a Superior Vau, an Inferior 
Vau. 

126. Unto the Ancient One pertain all the Superiors, 
and unto Microprosopus the Inferiors. 

127. They depend not in another manner, but only 
thus; for from the Most Holy Ancient One do they 
depend. 

128. Forthe Name of the Ancient One is concealed in 
all things, neither is it found. 

129. But those letters which depend from the Ancient 
One, so that they may be established, are all inferiors. 
For were it not so, they could not be established. 

130. And therefore is the Holy Name* alike concealed 
and manifest. 

131. For that which is concealed pertaineth unto the 
Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed in all things. 

132. But that, indeed, which is manifested, because 
it dependeth, belongeth unto Microprosopus. (Otherwise, 
that which is manifested, is so for this reason—that it is 
manifested because it dependeth, ὥς.) 

133. And therefore do all the blessings require both 
concealment and manifestation. 

134. Those concealed letters which hang behind 
depend from the Most Holy Ancient One. 

135. Wherefore do they hang behind? For the 
purpose of establishing the Inferior Yod. (Otherwise, 
assuredly from the Skull, from the Forehead, from the 
Eyes, do they depend. And the Yod Maternalf dependeth 
towards the Inferior Yod.) 


* The student will observed throughout the Qabalah that great stress is 
laid on the power of names, which arises from the fact that each qabalistical 
name is the synthesis of a power. Hence to “ pronounce that name” is to 
use that power. 

+ The word I have translated “ Maternal " is AMH, Amah, with a double 
-Kametz point. Rosenroth renders it “ Yod Membri." 


ο ου Ες. HOLY ASSEMBLY. 273 


CHAPTER V. 
CONCERNING THE NOSE OF THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT ONE.’ 


136. THE Nose. From this nose, from the openings 
of the nostrils, the Spirit of Life rusheth forth upon 
Microprosopus. 

137. And from that opening of the nose, from those 
openings of the nostrils, dependeth the letter He, in 
order to establish the other and inferior He. 

138. And that Spirit proceedeth from the hidden 
brain, and She is called the Spirit of Life, and through 
that Spirit* will all men understand ΟΗΚΜΤΗΑ, 
Chokmatha, Wisdom, in the time of King Messiah. 

139. As it is written, Isa. xi. 2: *' And the Spirit of 
Wisdom and Understanding, AVCa CuKMH V BINH, 
Ruach Chokmah Va-Binah, shall rest upon Him," &c. 

140. This nose is life in every part; perfect joy, rest 
of spirit, and health. 

141. The nose of Microprosopus is as we have (before) 
conformed it. 

0 concerning Him it is said, Ps. xviii. 9: 
* There ascendeth a smoke in His nose,” &c. 

143. But concerning this it is written, Isa. xlviii. 9: 
« And for my name's sake will I defer mine anger 
(literally, lengthen my nose) for thee.” 

144. (But in the book which is called ** The Treatise 
of the School of Rav Yeyeva the Elder,” the letter He is 
located in the mouth, and he doth not argue in the same 
manner as in the text, neither doth he bring about the 


* Speaking of the unity, the '' Sepher Yetzirah " says: “ One is She, the 
Spirit of the Elohim of life (blessed and more than blessed be His name who 


is the life of ages), Voice, and Spirit, and Word—this is She the Spirit of 
holiness. 


T 


274 KABBALAH. 


same combination, although the matter eventuateth in the 
same manner.) 

145. But yet from the letter the judgment dependeth, 
and judgment pertaineth unto the nose (of Microprosopus). 
Like as it is written, Ps. xviii. ο: * Smoke ascendeth 
out of His nose,” 

146. And if thou sayest that behold also it is 
written, “And fire out of His mouth consumeth," 
surely the foundation of wrath dependeth from His 
nose. 

147. All the conformations of the Most Holy Ancient 
One are formed forth from the calm and concealed 
brain. 

I48. And all the conformations of Microprosopus are 
formed through the Inferior Chokmah, Wisdom. Like as 
it is written, Ps. civ. 24: “ ΑΙ] these hast thou made in 
Chokmah." And certainly it (Wisdom) is the epitome 
of all things. 

149. Now what is the difference between H, He, and 
H, He? By the Inferior He is judgment stirred up; 
but in this instance, through the other He, mercy unto 
mercy is denoted. 


CHAPTER VI. 
CONCERNING THE BEARD OF THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT ONE. 


150. From the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One 
hangeth the whole ornament of all, and the Influence; 
for all things are called from that beard, Influence. 

I51. This is the Ornament of all Ornaments, and 


this influence do all the superiors and inferiors alike 
behold. 


W ESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 275 


152. From this Influence dependeth the life of all 
things. 

153. From this Influence heavens and earth de- 
pend, the rains of grace, and the nourishment of all 
things. 

154. From this Influence cometh the providence of 
all things. From this Influence depend all the superior 
and inferior hosts. 

155. Thirteen fountains of excellent and precious oil 
depend from this beard of most glorious Influence, and 
they all flow down into Microprosopus. 

156. Say not thou, however, that all do so, but nine of 
them are found (in Microprosopus) for the purpose of 
diverting the judgments. 

157. And whensoever this Influence hangeth down in 
equilibrium even unto the heart, all the Holinesses of 
the Holinesses of Holiness depend from it. 

158. In that Influence is extended an expansion of 
the Supernal Emanation,* which is the Head of all Heads, 
which is not known nor perfected, and which neither 
superiors nor inferiors have known, because from that 
Influence all things depend. 

159. Inthis beard the Three Heads concerning which 
we have spoken are expanded, and all things are associated 
together in this Influence, and are found therein. 

160. And therefore every ornament of ornaments 
dependeth from that Influence. 

161. Those letters which depend from this Ancient 
One all hang in that beard, and are associated together 
in that Influence. 

162. And they hang therein for the purpose of estab- 
lishing the other letters. 

163. For unless those letters could ascend into the 
Ancient One, those other letters could not be established. 

164. And therefore Moses saith when necessary 

* The word is QVTRA : Rosenroth translates it by “ Aporrhea." It may 
also be translated “vapour,” or ‘‘ nebula." 


T 2 


276 KABBALA H. 


IHVH, IHVH, twice; and so that an accent dis- 
tinguishes the one from the other. 

165. For assuredly from the Influence all things 
depend. 

166. By that Influence are both superiors and inferiors 
brought unto reverence, and are prostrate before It. 

167. Blessed is he who attaineth hereunto. 


CHAPTER Wit: 
CONCERNING THE BRAIN AND THE WISDOM IN GENERAL. 


168. OF this Most Holy Ancient One, Concealed with 
all Concealments, there isno mention made, neither is He 
found. 

169. For since this Head is the supreme of all the 
supernals, hence He is only symbolized as a head alone 
without body, for the purpose of establishing all things. 

170, And He Himself is concealed, and hidden, and 
kept recondite by all things. 

171. His conformation is that He is formed forth in 
that brain, the most hidden of all things, which is 
expanded and formed forth, and hence proceedeth the 
superior and inferior CHSD, Chesed, Mercy. 

172. And the superior Chesed is formed forth and 
expanded, and all things are comprehended in this con- 
cealed brain. 

173. For when that White Brilliance is formed forth 
in that Light, it acteth upon that which acteth upon this 
brain, and it is enlightened. 

174. And the second brain dependeth from that very 
glorious Influence, it is expanded into the thirty-two * 


* The ten numbers ard twenty-two letters. 


Wee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 279 


paths, when it is illuminated, then it shineth from that 
very glorious Influence.* 

175. Therefore are the Three Supernal Heads illu- 
minated; Two Heads, and One which comprehendeth 
them; and they haug in that Influence, and by It are 
they comprehended. 

176. Hence becometh the ornament of the beard to 
be manifested, which is the occult Influence. 

177. And those inferiors are conformed, like as the 
Most Holy Ancient One. 

178. 'The Three Heads surround Him ; thus all things 
can appear in the Three Heads; and when they are 
illuminated all things depend together from Him in the 
Three Heads, whereof two are on the two sides, and one 
which includeth them. 

179. And if thou sayest, Who is the Most Holy 
Ancient One?” Come and see. The Supreme Head is 
that which is not. known, nor comprehended, nor desig- 
nated, and that (Head) comprehendeth all things. 

180. And the Two Heads are contained in ltself. 
(Otherwise hang, &c.) 

181. And then are all these things thus ordained; 
truly Himself existeth not in numeration, nor in system, 
nor in computation, but in the judgment of the heart. 

182. Concerning this it is written, Ps. xxxix. 2: “I 
said I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not 
with my tongue." 

183. The place of commencement is found from the 
Most Holy Ancient One, and it is illuminated by the 
Influence. That is the Light of Wisdom. 

184. And it is extended in thirty-two directions, and 
departeth from that hidden brain, from that Light which 
existeth 1n Itself. 

185. And because the Most Holy Ancient One shineth 
inthe beginning (otherwise, in the wisdom), this itself is 

* MZL = 40-7430 = 77, which is OZ, Strength or Vigour. This 
Gematria is worthy of note as giving the idea of foundational power. 


278 KABBALAH. 


this. And the same is that beginning from which 
manifestation is made, 


186. And is conformed in the Three Heads, which 
One Head includeth. 

187. And those three are extended into Microprosopus, 
and from them all things shine forth. 

188. Thenceforth this Wisdom instituteth a formation, 
and produceth a certain river which floweth down and 
goeth forth to water the garden. 

189. And it entereth into the head of Microprosopus, 
and formeth a certain other brain. 

190. And thence it is extended and floweth forth into 
the whole body, and waitereth all those plants (of the 
garden of Eden). 

191. This is that which standeth written, Gen. 11. 9: 
* And a river went out of Eden to water the garden," &c. 

192. But also this Wisdom instituteth another forma- 
tion, and is extended and goeth into the head of Micro- 
prosopus, and formeth another brain. 

193. Thatis the Light from which are produced those 
two rivulets which are associated together, carved out 
hollows in the One Head, which is called the depth of 
the fountain.* 

194. Concerning which it is written, Prov. iii. 20: 
“ In DOTH, Daath,t Knowledge,the depths are broken up." 

195. And it entereth into the head of Microprosopus, 
and formeth another brain. 

196. And thenceforth is it extended and goeth into 
the interior parts of His body, and filleth all those 
conclaves and assemblies of His body. 

197. Thisis that same which is written, Prov. xxiv. 4: 
* In Daath shall the secret places be filled." 

198. And those shine from the Light of that supernal 


* I.e., the containing power. 

+ Daath is the conjunction of Chokmah and Binah. (See “ Book of 
Concealed Mystery," ch. i. $ 40.) 

+ See "Greater Holy Assembly,” ch. xxviii. $ 566. 


Bae Ρο ΡΑΕ OLY ASSEMBLY. 279 


concealed brain which shineth iu the Influence, MZL, of 
the Most Holy Ancient One. 

199. And all things depend mutually from Himself, 
and mutually are bound together unto Himself, until He 
is known, because all things are one, and HVA, Hoa, He, 
the Ancient One, is all things, neither from Him can 
anything whatsoever be separated. 

200. Into three other Lights, which are called the 
Fathers, do these three Lights shine, and these fathers 
shine into the children, and all things shine forth from 
the one place.* 

201. When He, that Ancient One, who is the Grace of 
all Grace, is manifested, all things are found in light and 
in perfect happiness. 

202. This Eden is derived from the superior Eden, 
the Concealed with all Concealments. 

203. And therefore is that Eden called the begin- 
ning in the Ancient One; neither yet, however, is there 
beginning or end.f 

204. And since in Him beginning and end exist not, 
hence He is not called ATHH, Atah, Thou; seeing that 
He is concealed and not revealed. But HVA, Hoa, He, 
is He called. 

205. But in that aspect wherein the beginning is 
found, the name ATHH, Atah, Thou, hath place, and 
the name AB, Ab, Father. For it is written, Isa. lxiii. 
16: “ Since Atah, Thou, art Ab, our Father.” 

206. In the teaching of the school of Rav Yeyeva 
the Elder, the universa! rule is that Microprosopus be 
called ATHH, Atah, Thou; but that the Most Holy 
Ancient One, who is concealed, be called HVA, Hoa, He; 
and also with reason. 


* This is analogous to the teaching of the “Sepher Yetzirah,” that the Three 
Mothers A, M, Su, radiate into three paternal forms of the same. A, M, 
and Su, symbolize the potencies of Air, Water, and Fire. 

+ For commencement denotes end, and end denotes commencement; how, 
then, in the Absolute can there be either? Nevertheless, in the Absolute 
must we seek for the hypothetical starting-point of life. 


280 KABBALAH. 


207. Now truly in that place wherein beginning is 
found, is He thus called, although He is concealed. 

208. And therefrom is the beginning, and it is called 
ATHH, Atah, Thou; and He is the Father of the 
Fathers. 

209. And that Father proceedeth from the Most 
Holy Ancient One, like as it is written, Job xxviii. 12: 
* And CHKMH, Chokmah,* Wisdom, is found from ATN, 
Ain, the Negatively Existent One;" and therefore is 
He not known. 

210. Come and see! It is written, ibid. 22: “The 
Elohim have known the path;” His path, properly 
speaking. 

211. But again, further on: * VHVA, Va-Hoa, and 
He Himself knoweth His place;" His place properly 
speaking ; much more His path; and much more this 
WISDOM which is concealed in the Most Holy Ancient One. 

212. This Wisdom is the beginning of all things. 
Thencefrom are expanded the thirty-two paths: SHBILIN, 
Shebilin, Paths, I say; and not ARCHIN, Archin, By- 
ways. 

213. And in them is the Law comprehended, in the 
twenty-two letters and in the ten utterances. 

214. This Chokmah is the Father of Fathers, and in 
this Chokmah is beginning and end discovered; and 
therefore is there one Chokmah supernal, and another 
Chokmah inferior. 

215. When Chokmah is extended, then is He called 
the Father of Fathers, for in none else are all things 
comprehended save in Him. (Otherwise, when they are 
expanded all things are called Chokmoth,} and the 
Father of Fathers; all things are comprehended in no 
place, save herein.) 


* Let the student carefully note that this is the second Sephira, the I of 
ΤΗΥ Η, the Father proceeding from Macroprosopus, Kether, as Ile proceedeth 
from Ain Soph. 

+ The Sephiroth, or numbers. 

ti Chokmoth is p'ural of Chokmah, Wisdom. 


Λο R HOLY ASSEMBLY. 281 


PENES written, Ps. civ. 25: “ All things in 
Chokmah hast Thou formed.” 

217. Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands, and re- 
joiced, and said: Assuredly it is Eden or Paradise, and 
all things have their operation in this hour. 


CRAPPER VIII. 
CONCERNING THE FATHER AND THE MOTHER IN SPECIAL. 


218. COME and behold. When the Most Holy Ancient 
One, the Concealed with all Concealments, desired to be 
formed forth, He conformed all things under the form 
of Male and Female; and in such place wherein Male 
and Female are comprehended. 

219. For they could not permanently exist save in 
another aspect of the Male and the Female (their 
countenances being joined together). 

220. And this Wisdom embracing all things, when 
it goeth forth and shineth forth from the Most Holy 
Ancient One, shineth not save under the form of Male 
and Female. 

221. Therefore is this Wisdom extended, and it is 
found that it equally becometh Male and Female. 

222. CHKMH AB BINH AM, Chokmah Ab Binah 
Am: Chokmah* is the Father, and Binah is the Mother, 
and therein are Chokmah, Wisdom, and Dinab, Under- 
standing, counterbalanced together in most perfect 
equality of Male and Female. 

223. And therefore are all things established in the 


* Chokmah is the second and Binah is the third of the Sephiroth. This 
section is a sufficient condemnation of all those who wish to make out that 
woman is inferior to man. 


282 KABBALAH. 


equality of Male and Female; for were it not so, how 
could they subsist ! 

224. This beginning is the Father of all things ; the 
Father of all Fathers; and both are mutually bound 
together, and the one path shineth into the other— 
Chokmah, Wisdom, as the Father; Binah, Understand- 
ing, as (b Mother. 

225. Itis written, Prov. ii. 3: “ If thou callest Binah 
the Mother." 

226. When They are associated together e gene- 
rate, and are expanded in truth. 

227. ln the teaching of the school of Rav Yeyeva the 
Elder it is thus taught: “ What is Binah the Mother of 
Understanding ?" Truly when They are mutually asso- 
clated together. 

228. Assuredly Yod, I, impregnateth the letter He, 
H, and produceth a Son, and She herself bringeth Him 
forth.* 

229. And therefore is it called BINH, as if (it were 
a transposition of) BN IH, Ben Yah, Son of IH (or J, 
Yod, H, He, and BN, the Son). 

230. But They both are found to be the perfection of 
all things when They are associated together, and when the 
Son is in Them the Syntagma of all things findeth place. 

231. For in Their conformations are They found to be 
the perfection of all things—Father and Mother, Son 
and Daughter. 

232. These things have not been revealed save unto 
the Holy Superiors who have entered therein and de- 
parted therefrom, and have known the paths of the Most 
Holy God (may He be blessed !), so that they have not 
erred in them either on the right hand or on the left. 


* For Chokmah and Binah in the Sephiroth answer unto I and H in the 
name IH VH, as has been already shown in the Introduction ; and these bring 
forth Microprosopus the Son, the letter Fau, V, answering in numerical value 
to the number 6, and to the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth 
Sephiroth. 


Wee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 283. 


233. For thus it is written, Hos. xiv. ο: “The paths 
of Tetragrammaton are true, and the just shall walk in 
them,” &c. 

235. For these things are concealed, and the Holy 
Highest Ones shine in them, like as light proceedeth 
from the shining of a lantern. 

236. These things are not revealed save unto those 
who have entered therein and departed therefrom; for 
as for him who hath not entered therein and departed 
therefrom, better were it for him that he had never been 
born. 

237. For it hath been manifested before the Most. 
Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments, 
because these things have shone into mine heart in the 
perfection of the love and fear of the Most Holy God, 
may He be blessed ! 

238. And these, my sons, who are here present, know 
these things; for into these matters have they entered 
and therefrom have they departed; but neither yet 
into all (the secrets of them).* 

239. But now are these things illustrated in (their) 
perfection, even as it was necessary. Blessed be my 
portion with them in this world! 

240. Rabbi Schimeon said: All which I have said 
concerning the Most Holy Ancient One, and all which I 
have said concerning Microprosopus, all are one, all are 
HVA, Hoa, Himself, all are Unity, neither herein hath 
separation place. 

241. Blessed be HVA, Hoa, He, and blessed be His 
Name unto the Ages of the Ages. 

242. Come, behold! This beginning which is called 
Father,f is comprehended in I, Yod, i which dependeth 
from the Holy Influence. 


* This clause refers to the “ Unwritten Qabalah.” 

+ Chokmah, the second Sephira, which, however, is as it were the re- 
petition of Kether. 

t That is, the letter I, Fod, in IHVH, which is said in the ‘ Book of 
Concealed Mystery °’ to symbolize Macroprosopus only in its highest point. 


284 KABBALAH. 


243. And therefore is I, Yod, the Most Concealed of 
all the other letters.* 

244. For I, Yod, is the beginning and the end of all 
things. 

245. And that river which floweth on and goeth forth 
is called the World, which is ever to come and ceaseth 
never. 

246. And this is the delight of the just, that they 
may be made worthy of that world which is to come, 
which ever watereth the garden of Eden, nor faileth. 

247. Concerning this it is written, Isa. lviii. 11 : “ And 
like a fountain of water, whose waters fail not." 

248. And that world to come is created through I, Yod. 

249. Ας it is written, Gen. 1. ο: “ And a river went 
forth out of Eden to water the garden." 

250. For I, Yod, includeth two letters. 

251. In the teaching of the school of Rav Yeyeva 
the Elder thus is the tradition. Wherefore are VD, Vau 
Daleth,t comprehended in IVD, Yod? Assuredly the 
planting of the garden is properly called V, Vaw; and 
there is another garden which is D, Daleth, and by that 
Vau is Daleth watered, which is the symbol of the 
quaternary.} 

252. And an Arcanum is extended from this passage, 
where it is written: “ And a river went forth out of 
Eden.” 

253. What is Eden? It is the supernal CHKMH, 
Chokmah, Wisdom, and that is I, Yod (in J, V, D). 

* See '' Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. ii. $ 37 ; ch. iv. § 11. 

+ See “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. ii. § 37. 

ti The amount of occult symbolism in this section is enormous, and the 
key of it is the name of the letter I, which is IVD, Yod. This is a trinity 
of letters, and their numerical value is I = 10, V = 6, D = 4, total 20, 
equivalent to double I; but for reasons given in the “ Book of Concealed 
Mystery " the second I is reproduced by a Hexad and a Tetrad—namely, V 
and D. Il = ro, the decimal scale of Sephirotic notation, the key of pro- 
cessional creation; V = 6 = Tiphereth, and Microprosopus the Son united 


to D = 4, the Cross. Here is the mystery of the crucifixion of the Son on 
the tree οἵ life’; and again the Qal iah agrees with Christian symbolism. 


Gee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 285 


254. “Το water the garden.” That is V, Vau. 

255. * And thence it is divided and goeth forth into 
four heads.” That is D, Daleth. 

256. And all things are included in IVD, Yod, and 
therefore is the Father called All, the Father of Fathers. 

257. The beginning of all is called the Home of All. 
Whence IVD, Yod, is the beginning and the end of all; 
like as it is written, Ps. civ. 24: “ All things in Chok- 
mah hast Thou made.” 

258. In His place He is not manifested, neither is He 
known; when He is associated with the Mother, BAMA, 
Be-Ama, then is He made known (otherwise, symbolized) 
in the Mother, BAIMA, Be-Aima.* 

259. And therefore is Aima known to be the con- 
summation of all things, and She is signified to be the 
beginning and the end. 

260. For all things are called Chokmah, and therein 
are all things concealed; and the Syntagma of all things 
is the Holy Name. 

261. Thus far have we mystically described that 
which we have not said on allthe other days. But now 
are the aspects shown forth. 

262. (As to the Sacred Name IHVH,) I, Fod, is in- 
cluded in this Chokmah, Wisdom; H, He, is Aima, 
and is called Binah, Understanding; VH, Vau He, are 
those two Children who are produced from Aima, the 
Mother. 

263. Also we have learned that the name BINH, 
Binah, comprehendeth all things. For in Her is I, Yod, 
which is associated with Aima, or the letter H, He, and 
together they produce BN, Len, the Son, and this is the 


* De Ama, with the Mother. Here Ama, AMA, Mother = 42. Be 
Aima, in the Mother. Here Aima, AIMA = 52 = BN, Ben, Son. This 
Gematria is most important, because, be it noted, Aima, AIMA, is the 
letter I, Yod, which we have just been told represents Chokmah, joined to 
AMA, Motker, which is Binah, BINH, which again is BN 1H by Metathesis, 
Ben Yod Hc—1i.e., son of IH, eternally con‘oined in Briah. 


286 KABBALAH. 


word Binah. Father and Mother, who are I, Yod, and 
H, He, with whom are interwoven the letters B, Beth, 
and N, Nun, which are BN, Ben; and thus far regard- 
ing Binah. 

264. Also is She called THBVNH, Thebunah, the 
Special Intelligence. Wherefore is She sometimes called 
Thebunah, and not Binah Ὁ 

265. Assuredly Thebunah is She called at that time 
in which Her two Children appear, the Son and the 
Daughter, BN VBTn, Ben Va-Bath, who are VH, 
Vau He; and at that time is She called THBVNH, 
Thebunah. 

266. For all things are comprehended in those letters, 
VH, Vau He, which are BN VBTH, Ben Va-Bath, Son 
and Daughter ; and all things are one system, and these 
are the letters THBVNH. 

267. In the Book of Rav Hamenuna the Elder it 
is sald that Solomon revealeth the primal conformation 
(that is, the Mother) when he saith, Cant. i. 15 : “ Be- 
hold, thou art fair, my love;” wherefore he followeth it 
out himself. 

268. And he calleth the second conformation the 
Bride, which is called the Inferior Woman. 

269. And there are some who apply both these names 
(those, namely, of Love and Bride) to this Inferior Woman, 
but these are not so. 

270. For the first H, He (of IHV.H), is not called 
the Bride; but the last H, Ze, is called the Bride at 
certain times on account of many symbolic reasons. 

271. For many are the times when the Male is not 
associated with Her, but is separated from Her. 

272. Concerning this period it is said, Lev. xviii. 19 : 
* Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman in the 
separation of her uncleanness." 

273. But when the Female hath been purified, and 
the Male desireth to be united unto Her, then is she 
called the Bride—the Bride, properly so called. 


Ιου ο κ BOLY ASSEMBLY. 287 


274. But as to that which pertaineth unto the Mother, 
then the benevolence of Them both is not taken away for 
all eternity. 

275. Together They (Chokmah and Binah, IH) go 
forth, together They are at rest; the one ceaseth not 
from the other, and the one is never taken away from 
the other. 

276. And therefore is it written, Gen. ii. 10: “ And 
a river went forth out of Eden ”—i.e., properly speaking, 
it continually goeth forth and never faileth. 

277. As it is written, Isa. lviii. r1:  Απά like a 
fountain of waters, whose waters fail not." 

278. And therefore is She called “ My love," since 
from the grace of kindred association They rest in perfect 
unity. l 

279. But the other is called the Bride, for when the 
Male cometh that He may consort with Her, then is She 
the Bride, for She, properly speaking, cometh forth as the 
Bride. 

280. And therefore doth Solomon expound those two 
forms of the Woman; and concerning the first form 
indeed he worketh hiddenly, seeing it is hidden. 

281. But the second form is more fully explained, 
seeing that it is not so hidden as the other. 

282. But at the end all his praise pertaineth unto 
Her who is supernal, as it is written, Cant. vi. 9 : “ She 
is the only one of Her Mother, She is the choice one of 
Her that bare Her.” 

283. And since this Mother, Aima, is crowned with 
the crown of the Bride, and the grace of the letter I, 
Yod, ceaseth not from Her for ever, hence unto Her 
arbitration 1s committed all the liberty of those inferior, 
and all the liberty of all things, and all the liberty of 
sinners, so that all things may be purified. 

284. As it is written, Lev. xvi. 30: * Since in that 
day he shall atone for you.” | 

285. Also it is written, Lev. xxv. 10 : “ And ye shall 


288 KABBALAH. 


hallow the fiftieth year.”* This year is IVBL, Yobel, 
Jubilee. 

286. What is Yobel? As it is written, Jer. xvii. 8: 
“VOL IVBL, Va-El Yobel, And spreadeth out her roots 
by the river; " therefore that river which ever goeth forth 
and floweth, and goeth forth and faileth not. 

287. It is written, Prov. ii. 3: “If thou wilt Gam 
Binah the Mother, and wilt give thy voice unto 
Thebunah.” 

288. Seeing it is here said, “If thou wilt call Binah 
the Mother,” wherefore is Thebunah added ? 

289. Assuredly, according as I have said, all things 
are supernal truth: Binah is higher than "Thebunah. 
For in the word BINH, Binah, are shown Father, Mother, 
and Son; since by the letters ΤΗ, Father and Mother are 
denoted, and the letters BN, denoting the Son, are 
amalgamated with them. 

290. THBVNH, Thebunah, is the whole completion of 
the children, since it containeth the letters BN, Ben, 
BTu, Bath, and VH, Vau He, by which are denoted the 
Son and Daughter. 

201, Yet AB VAM, 4b Ve-Am, the Father and the 
Mother, are not found, save BAIMA, Be-Aima, in the 
Mother, for the venerable Aima broodeth over Them, 
neither is She uncovered. 

292. Whence it cometh that that which embraceth 
the two Children is called THBVNH, Thebunah, and that 
which embraceth the Father, the Mother, and the Son is 
called BINH, Binah. 

293. And when all things are comprehended, they 
are comprehended therein, and are called by that name 
of Father, Mother, and Son. 

204. And these are CHKMH, Wisdom, Father; 
BINH, Understanding, Mother; and DOTs, Daath, 
Knowledge. 


* The number answering to the “ fifty gates of Binah." (See “ Book of 
Concealed Mystery,” ch. i. § 46.) 


Mee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 289 


295. Since that Son * assumeth the symbols of His 
Father and of His Mother, and is called DOTn, Daath, 
Knowledge, since He is the testimony of Them both. 

296. And that Son is called the first-born, as it is 
written, Exod. iv. 22: “ Israel is my first-born son." 

297. And since He is called first-born, therefore it 
implieth dual offspring. 

298. And when He increaseth, in His Crown appear 
three divisions.f 

299. But whether it be taken in this way or in that, 
there are as well two as three divisions herein, for all 
things are one; and so is it in this (light) or in 
that.t 

300. Nevertheless, He (the Son) receiveth the inheri- 
tance of His Father and of His Mother. 

301. What is that inheritance? These two crowns, 
which are hidden within Them, which They pass on in 
succession to this Son.§ 

302. From the side of the Father (Chokmah) there is 
one Crown concealed therein, which is called Chesed. 

303. And from the side of the Mother (Binah) there 
is one Crown, which is called Geburah. 

304. And all those crown His head (1.6, the Head of 
Microprosopus), and He taketh them. 

305. And when that Father and Mother shine above 
Him, all (these crowns) are cailed the phylacteries of the 


* Compare this with the Egyptian Horus, the son of Isis and Osiris. 
Also notice the interchange of symbols between Amen, Kneph, and Khem. 
The name of the great Egyptian God Amen is noticeable when we compare 
it with the qabalistic name AMN. 

+ Compare with this the alchemical symbolism of Duenech, the King of 
Earth, after being overwhelmed by the waters, rising again, glorified and 
crowned with the triple crown of silver, iron, and gold—Chesed, Geburah, 
and Tiphereth, in the alchemic Sephiroth of the metals. 

€ The meaning is, that Father and Mother are contained in the Sun; for 
these are the second, third, and sixth Sephiroth—i.e., 2, 3, and 6; and 
both 2 and 3 are contained in 6, for 2x 3 = 6. 

§ The reflexive essence of Kether, the Crown, which operates in Chukmah 
and Binah. 


U 


290 KABBALAH. 


Head, and that Son taketh all things, and becometh the 
heir of all. 

306. And He passeth on His inheritance unto the 
Daughter, and the Daughter is nourished by Him. But, 
properly speaking, henceforth (from the parents) doth the 
Son become the heir, and not the Daughter, 

307. The Son becometh the heir of His Father and of 
His Mother, and not the Daughter, but by Him is the 
Daughter cherished. 

308. As it is written, Dan.iv. 12: “ And in that tree 
food for all.” 

309. And if thou sayest all, assuredly He as well as 
She are called TzDIQ, Tzediq, Just, and 'TZDQ, Tzedeg, 
Justice, which are in one and are one. 

310. All things are thus. Father and Mother are 
mutually contained in and associated with Themselves. 

311. And the Father is the more concealed (of the two), 
and the whole adhereth unto the Most Holy Ancient One. 

312. And dependeth from the Holy Influence, which 
is the Ornament of all Ornaments. 

313. And they, the Father and the Mother, constitute 
the abode, as I have said. 

314. As it is written, Prov. xxiv. 3, 4 = E 
Chokmah is the abode constructed, and by Thebunah is 
it established, and in Diath shall the chambers be filled 
with all precious and pleasant riches." 

315. Also it is written, Prov. xxi. 18: “For itis@ 
pleasant thing if thou keep (Daath) within thee." 

316. This is the system of all things, even as I have 
said, and (all things) depend from the Glorious Holy 
Influence. 

317. Rabbi Schimeon said: In the (former) Assembly 
I revealed not all things, and all those things have been 
concealed even until now. 

318. And I have wished to conceal them, even unto 
the world to come, because there also a certain question 
will be propounded unto me. 


ο ους θε ASSEMBLY. 201 


emo, 2s it is written, Isa. xxxii 6: “And 
Chokmah and Diath shall be the stability of thy times, 
and strength of salvation; the fear of Tetragrammaton 
is His treasure,” &c., and they shall seek out Wisdom, 
Chokmah. 

320. Now truly thus is the will of the Most Holy 
and Blessed God, and without shame will I enter in 
before His palace. 

Se eis Written, I Sam. ii. 3: “Since AL 
ΡΟΝΤΗ, El Daoth,* is Tetragrammaton.” Daoth, or of 
Knowledges (plural), properly speaking, for He acquireth 
Daoth by inheritance. 

322. Through Daoth are all His palaces filled, as 1% 
is written, Prov. xxix.: * And in Diath shall the cham- 
bers be filled.” 

323. And therefore Diath is not furthermore re- 
vealed, for It occultly pervadeth Him inwardly. 

324. And is comprehended in that brain and in the 
whole body, since * El Daoth is Tetragrammaton.” 

325. In the “Book of the Treatise” it is said 
concerning these words, ‘‘ Since El Daoth is Tetragram- 
maton,” read not DOVTH, Daoth, of knowledges, but 
ΟΡΥΤΗ,Τ Ldoth, of testimony. 

326. For HVA, Hoa, He Himself, is the testimony 
of all things, the testimony of the two portions. 

327. And it is said, Ps. lxxviii. 5: * And He estab- 
lished a testimony, ΟΡΥ ΤΠ, in Jacob.” 

328. Moreover, also, although we have placed that 
matter in the “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” still also 
there what is mentioned of it is correct, and so all things 
are beautiful and all things are true. 

329. When the matter is hidden, that Father and 
Mother contain all things, and all things are concealed 
in them. 

330. And they themselves are hidden beneath the 


* Plural of Daath. T By Metathesis. 
uU 2 


292 KABBALAH. 


Holy Influence of the Most Ancient of all Antiquity ; in 
Him are they concealed, in Him are all things included. 

331. HVA, Hoa, He Himself, is all things; blessed 
be Hoa, and blessed be His Name in eternity, and unto 
the ages of the ages. 

332. Allthe words of the conclave of the Assembly 
are beautiful, and all are holy words— words which decline 
not either unto the right hand or unto the left. 

333. All are words of hidden meaning for those who 
have entered in and departed thence, and so are they all. 

334. And those words have hereunto been concealed ; 
therefore have I feared to reveal the same, but now they 
are revealed. 

335. And I reveal them in the presence of the Most 
Holy Ancient King, for not for mine own glory, nor for 
the glory of my Father's house, do I this ; but I do this 
that I may not enter in ashamed before His palaces. 

336. Henceforth I only see that He, God the Most 
Holy—may He be blessed !—and all these truly just men 
who are here found, can all consent (hereunto) with me. 

337. For I see that all can rejoice in these my 
nuptials, and that they all can be admitted unto my 
nuptials in that world. Blessed be my portion! 

338. Rabbi Abba saith that when (Rabbi Schimeon) 
had finished this discourse, the Holy Light (i.e., Rabbi 
Schimeon) lifted up his hands and wept, and shortly after 
smiled. 

339. For he wished to reveal another matter, and 
said: I have been anxious concerning this matter all my 
days, and now they give me not leave. 

340. But having recovered himself he sat down, and 
murmured with his lips and bowed himself thrice ; neither 
could any other man behold the place where he was, 
much less him. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 293 


CHAPTER IX. 
CONCERNING MICROPROSOPUS AND HIS BRIDE IN GENERAL. 


341. HE said: Mouth, mouth, which hath followed 
out all these things, they shall not dry up thy fountain. 

342. Thy fountain goeth forth and faileth not: surely 
concerning thee may this be applied: “And a river 
went forth out of Eden;” also that which is written: 
“ Like a fountain of waters whose waters fail not.” 

343. Now I testify concerning myself, that all the 
days which I have lived I have desired to behold this 
day, yet was it not the will (of God). 

344. For with this crown is this day crowned, and 
now as yet I intend to reveal certain things before God 
the Most Holy—may He be blessed !—and all these things 
crown mine head. 

345. And this day * suffereth not increase, neither 
can it pass on into the place of another day, for this 
whole day hath been yielded unto my power. 

346. And now I begin to reveal these things, that I 
may not enter ashamed into the world to come. There- 
fore I begin and say : 

347. “tis written, Ps. Ixxxix. 14: ‘TzDQ ΥΜΒΗΡΤΊ, 
Tzedeq Va-Meshephat, Justice and Judgment are the abode 
of Thy throne; CaSD VAMTH, Chesed Va-Emeth, Mercy 
and Truth shall go before Thy countenance.’ " 

348. What wise man will examine this, so that he 
may behold His paths, (those, namely,) of the Most Holy 
Supernal One, the judgments of truth, the judgments 
which are crowned with His supernal crowns. 

349. For I say that all the lights which shine from 


* Meaning the period of revealing these matters, not exactly a day of 
twenty-four hours: day in the scriptural and qabalistical sense. 


294 KABBALAH. 


the Supreme Light, the Most Concealed of All, are all 
paths (leading) towards that Light. 

350. And in that Light which existeth in those single 
paths, whatsoever is revealed is revealed. 

351. And all those lights adhere mutually together, 
this light in that light, and that light in this light. 

352. And they shine mutually into each other, neither 
are they divided separately from each other. 

353. That Light, I say, of those lights, severally and 
conjointly, which are called the conformations of the 
King, or of the Crown of the King, that which shineth 
and adhereth to that Light, which is the innermost of 
all things, nor ever shineth without them. 

354. And therefore do all things ascend in one path, 
and all things are crowned by one and the same thing, 
and one thing is not separated from another, since HVA, 
Hoa, EET UE and His Name, are one. 

355. That Light which is manifested is called n 
Vestment; for He Himself, the King, 1s the Light of all 
the — 

356. In that Light 1s Hoa, Who is not separated nor 
manifested. 

357. And all those lights and all those luminaries 
shine forth from the Most Holy Ancient One, the Con- 
cealed with all Concealments, who is the Highest Light. 

358. And whensoever the matter is accurately exa- 
mined, all those lights which are expanded are no 
longer found, save only that Highest Light. 

359. Who is hidden and not manifested, through 
those vestments of ornament which are the vestments 
of truth, QSHVT, Qeshot, the forms of truth, the lights 
of truth. 

360. Two light-bearers are found, which are the 
conformation of the throne of the King; and they are 
called TzDQ, Ττεάεῃ, Justice, and MSHPT, Meshephat, 
Judgment. 

361. And they are the beginning and the consumma- 


ee DISSE HOLY ASSEMBLY. 295 


tion. And through them are all the Judgments crowned, 
as well superior as inferior. 

μ 362. And they all are concealed in Meshephat. And 
from that Meshephat is Tzedeq nourished. 

363. And sometimes they call the same, MLKI TzDQ 
MLK SHLM, Meleki Tzedeq Melek Shalem, Melchizedek, 
King of Salem. 

364. When the judgments are crowned by Meshephat, 
all things are mercy; and all things are in perfect peace, 
because the one temperateth the other. 

365. Tzedeq and the Rigours are reduced into order, 
and all these descend into the world in peace and in 
mercy. 

366. And then is the hour sanctified, so that the 
Male and the Female are united, and the worlds all and 
several exist in love and in joy. 

367. But whensoever sins are multiplied in the 
world, and the sanctuary is polluted, and the Male and 
the Female are separated.* 

368. And when that strong Serpent beginneth to 
arise, Woe, then, unto thee, O World! who in that time 
arb nourished by this Tzedeq. For then arise many 
slayers of men and executioners (of judgment) in thee, 
O World. Many just men are withdrawn from thee. 

369. But wherefore is it thus? Because the Male is 
separated from the Female, and Judgment, Meshephat, is 
not united unto Justice, Tzedeq. 

370. And concerning this time it is written, Prov. 
xiii. 23: “There is that is destroyed, because therein is 
not Meshephat." Since Meshephat is departed from this 
Tzedeq which is not therefore restrained; and Tzedeq 
hath operation after another manner. 

371. And concerning this (matter) thus speaketh 
Solomon the king, Eccles. vii. 16: “ All these things 


* In other words, where there is unbalanced force, taere is the origin of 
evil. 


296 KABBALAH. 


have I seen in the days of my HBL, Hebel ; there 15 a 
just man who perisheth in his Tzedeq,” &c. 

372. Where by the word HBL, Hebel (which is usually 
translated “ vanity”), is understood the breath from those 
supernal breathers forth which are called the nostrils of 
the King. 

373. But when he saith HBLI, Hebeli, of my breath, 
Tzedeq, Justice, is to be understood, which is MLK VTHA 
QDISHA, Malkutha Qadisha, the holy Malkuth (Sanctum 
Regnum, the Holy Kingdom). 

374. For when She is stirred up in Her judgments 
and severities, then hath this saying place: ‘‘ There is a 
just man who perished in his Tzedeq." 

375. For what reason? Because Judgment, Meshe- 
phat, is far from Justice, Tzedeq. And therefore is it 
said, Prov. xii. 23: ‘‘And there is that is destroyed 
because therein is not Meshephat.” 

376. Comeand see! When some sublimely just man 
is found in the world, who is dear unto God the Most 
Holy One—may He be blessed !—then even if Tzedeq, 
Justice, alone be stirred up, still on account of him the 
world can bear it. 

377. And God the Most Holy—may He be blessed !— 
increaseth His glory so that He may not be destroyed by 
the severity (of the judgments). 

378. But if that just man remaineth not 1n his place, 
then from the midst is he taken away for example by 
that Meshephat, Judgment, so that before it he cannot 
maintain his place, how much less before Tzedeq, 
Justice. 

379. David the king said at first, Ps. xxvi. ο: “Try 
me, O Tetragrammaton, and prove me!" For I shall 
not be destroyed by allthe severities, not even by Tzedeq, 
Jnstice Herself, seeing that I am joined thereunto. 

380. For what is written, Ps. xvii. 15: * In Tzedeq, 
Justice, I wil behold Thy countenance.” Therefore, 
properly speaking, I cannot be destroyed through 


ae LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 297 


Tzedeq, seeing that 1 can maintain myself in its 
severities.* 

381. But after that he had sinned, he was even 
ready to be consumed by that Meshephat, Judgment. 
Whence it is written, Ps. cxliii. 2: * And enter not into 
Meshephat, Judgment, with Thy servant!” 

382. Come and see! When that Tzedeq, Justice, 18 
mitigated by that Meshephat, Judgment, then is it called 
TzDQH, Tzedeqah, Liberality. 

383. And the world is tempered by Chesed, Mercy, 
and is filled therewith. 

384. As itis written, Ps, xxxiii. 5: “ Delighting in 
TzDQH, Liberality, and MSHPT, Judgment; the earth 
is full of the CHSD, Mercy, of Tetragrammaton. 

385. I testify concerning myself, that during my 
whole life I have been solicitous in the world, that I 
should not fall under the severities of Justice, nor that 
the world should be burned up with the flames thereof. 

386. As it is written, Prov. xxx. 20: “ She eateth 
and wipeth her mouth." 

387. Thenceforward and afterwards all and singular 
are near unto the Abyss. 

388. And verily in this generation certain just men 
are given (upon earth); but they are few who arise that 
they may defend the flock from the four angles (other- 
wise, but judgments arise against the world, and desire 
to rush upon us). 


* Because in those severities, and beLind them, he can see the Counte- 
nance of God. 


208. KABBALAH. 


CHAPTER X. 


CONCERNING MICROPROSOPUS IN ESPECIAL, WITH CERTAIN 
DIGRESSIONS ; AND CONCERNING THE EDOMITE KINGS. 


389. HEREUNTO have I propounded how one thing 
agreeth with another; and I have expounded those 
things which have been concealed in the most Holy 
Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments; and 
how these are connected with those. 

390. But now for a time I will discourse concerning 
the requisite parts of Microprosopus; especially concern- 
ing those which were not manifested in the Conclave of 
the Assembly, and which have been concealed in mine 
heart, and have not been given forth in order therefrom. 

391. Hereunto have 1 mystical and in a subtle 
manner propounded all those matters, Blessed is his 
portion who entereth therein and departeth therefrom, 
and (blessed. the portion) of those who shall be the heirs of 
that inheritance. 

392. As it is written, Ps. cxliv. 15: “Blessed are 
the people with whom it is so,” &c. 

393. Now these be the matters which we have pro- 
pounded. The Father * and the Motherf adhere unto 
the Ancient One, and also unto His conformation; since 
they depend from the Hidden Brain, Concealed with all 
Concealments, and are connected therewith. 

394. And although the Most Holy Ancient One hath 
been conformed (as it were) alone (i.e., apparently apart 
from all things at first sight); yet when all things are 
accurately inspected, all things are HVA, Hoa, Himself, 
the Ancient One, alone. 

395. Hoa 15 and Hoa shall be; and all those forms 


* Chokmah. + Binab. 


INE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 299 


cohere with Himself, are concealed in Himself, and are 
not separated from Himself. 

396. The Hidden Brain is not manifested, and (Jficro- 
prosopus) doth not depend immediately from it. 

397. The Father and the Mother proceed from this 
Brain, and depend from It, and are connected with It. 

398. (Through Them) Microprosopus dependeth from 
the Most Holy Ancient One, and is connected (with Him). 
And these things have we already revealed in the 
Conclave of the Assembly. 

399. Blessed is his portion who entereth therein and 
departeth therefrom, and hath known the paths; so that 
he declineth not unto the right hand, or unto the left. 

400. But if any man entereth not therein and 
departeth therefrom, better were it for that (man) that 
he had never been born. For thus it is written, Hos. 
xiv. 10: “ True are Thy ways, O Tetragrammaton! 7 

401. Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: Through the 
whole day have I meditated on that saying where it is 
said, Ps. xxxiv. 2: “ My Nephesch* shall rejoice in 
Tetragrammaton, the humble shall hear thereof and 
rejoice ;” and now that whole text is confirmed (in my 
mind). 

402. ‘‘ My Nephesch shall rejoice in Tetragrammaton,” 
This is true, for my Neschamah is connected therewith, 
radiateth therein, adhereth thereto, and is occupied 
thereabout, and in this same occupation is exalted in its 
place. 

403. “ The humble shall hear thereof and rejoice.” 
All those just and blessed men who have come into com- 
munion with God, the Most Holy—blessed be He !—all 
hear and rejoice. 

404. Ah! now is the Holy One confessed ; and there- 
fore “ magnify Tetragrammaton with me, and let us exalt 
His Name together ! " 


* See Introduction concerning the parts of the soul, Chiah, Neschamab, 
Ruach, and Nephesch. 


300 KABBALAH. 


405. Thus is it written, Gen. xxxvi. 31 : “ And those 
are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom.” And 
also it is written thus, Ps. xlviii. 4: ‘‘ Since, lo! the 
kings assembled, they passed away together.” 

406. “ In the land of Edom.” That is, in the place 
wherewith the judgments are connected.” 

407. ‘‘ They passed away together.” Ας it is written, 
** And he died, and there reigned in his stead.” 

408. “ They themselves beheld, so were they 
astonished ; they feared, and hasted away.” Because 
they remained not in their place, since the conforma- 
tions of the King had not as yet been formed, and the 
Holy City and its walls were not as yet prepared. 

409. This is that which followeth in the text: “ As 
we have heard, so have we seen, in the city," &c. For 
all did not endure. 

410. But She (the Bride) now subsisteth beside the 
Male, with Whom She abideth. 

411. This is that which is written, Gen. xxxvi. 39: 
“ And Hadar reigned in his stead, and the name of his 
city was Pau, and the name of his wife was Mehetabel, 
the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mizaheb." 

412. Assuredly this have we before explained in the 
Assembly.* 

413. Now, also, in the book of the teaching of Rav 
Hamenuna the Elder it is said: “ And Hadar reigned 
in his stead.” The word HDR, Zadar, is properly to be 
expounded according unto that which is said, Lev. xxiii. 
40: “The fruit of trees which are HDR, Hadar, goodly.” 

414. “ And the name of his wife Mehetabel,” as it is 
written (in the text just cited), ** branches of palm trees." 

415. Also it is written, Ps. xcii. 3: “The just man 
shall flourish as the palm tree.” For this is of the male 
and female sex. 

416. She is called “the daughter of Matred;” that is, 


* See “Greater Holy Assembly,” ch. xlii. $$ 984-996 ; ch. xxvi. $$ 515- 
532- 


Ue LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 301 


the Daughter from that place wherein all things are 
bound together, which is called AB, Father. 

417. Alsoit is written, Job xxviii, 13 : / Man knoweth 
not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of 
the living.” 

418. She is the Daughter of Aima, the Mother ; from 
Whose side the judgments are applied which strive against 
all things. 

419. “ The Daughter of Mizaheb ; " because She hath 
nourishment from the two Countenances (Chokmah and 
Binah, which are within Kether) ; and shineth with two 
colours—namely from CHSD, Chesed, Mercy ; and from 
DIN, Din, Judgment. 

420. For before the world was established Counte- 
nance beheld not Countenance.* 

421. And therefore were the Prior Worlds destroyed, 
for the Prior Worlds were formed without (equilibrated) 
conformation. 

422. But these which existed not in conformation 
are called vibrating flames and sparks, like as when the 
worker in stone striketh sparks from the flint with his 
hammer, or as when the smith smiteth the iron and 
dasheth forth sparks on every side. 

423. And these sparks which fly forth flame and 
scintillate, but shortly they are extinguished. And these 
are called the Prior Worlds. 

424. And therefore have they been destroyed, and 
persist not, until the Most Holy Ancient One can be 
conformed, and the workman can proceed unto His work. 

425. And therefore have we related in our discourse 
that that ray sendeth forth sparks upon sparks in three 
hundred and twenty directions. 

426. And those sparks are called the Prior Worlds, 
and suddenly they perished. 

427. Then proceeded the workman unto His work, 
and was conformed, namely as Male and Female. 

* See “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. i. δὲ 2, 3, 4, et seq. 


302 KABBALAH. 


428. And those sparks became extinct and died, but 
now all things subsist. 

429. From a Light-Bearer of insupportable bright- 
ness proceeded a Radiating * Flame, dashing of like a 
vast and mighty hammer those sparks which were the 
Prior Worlds. 

430. And with most subtle ether were these inter- 
mingled and bound mutually together, but only when 
they were conjoined together, even the Great Father and 
Great Mother. 

431. From Hoa, Himself, is AB, the Father; and from 
Hoa, Himself, is Ruach, the Spirit ; Who are hidden in the 
Ancient of Days, and therein is that ether concealed. 

432. And It was connected with a light-bearer, which 
went forth from that Light-Bearer of insupportable bright- 
ness, which is hidden inthe Bosom of Aima, the Great 
Mother. 


CHAPTER XI. 


CONCERNING THE BRAIN OF MICROPROSOPUS AND ITS 
CONNECTIONS. 


433. AND when both can be conjoined and bound 
together mutually (i.e., the Father and the Mother), there 
proceedeth thenceforth a certain hard Skull. 

434. And it is extended on its sides, so that there 
may be one part on one side, and another one on another 
side. 

435. For as the Most Holy Ancient One is found to 
include equally in Himself the Three Heads, so all things 


* Compare this with Miólner, the hammer of Thor, of Scandinavian 
mythology. 
+ Chokmah and Binah, included in Kether. 


eee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 303 


are symbolized under the form of the Three Heads, as we 
have stated. 

436. Into this skull (ef ALicroprosopus) distilleth the 
dew from the White Head (of Macroprosopus), and cover- 
eth it. l 

437. And that dew appeareth to be of two colours, 
and by it is nourished the field of the holy apple trees. 

438. And from this dew of this Skull is the manna 
prepared for the just in the world to come.* 

439. And by it shall the dead be raised to life. 

440. But that manna hath not at any other time been 
prepared so that it might descend from this dew, save at 
that time when the Israelites were wandering in the 
wilderness, and the Ancient One supplied them with 
food from this place ; because that afterwards it did not 
fall out so more fully. | 

441. This is the same which is said, Exod. xvi. 4: 
* Behold I rain upon you bread from heaven.” And 
also that passage where it is thus written, Gen. xxvii. 28: 
* And the Elohim shall give unto thee of the dew of 
heaven." 

442. These things occur in that time. Concerning 
another time it is written: “The food of man is from 
God the Most Holy One—blessed be He!"—and that 
dependeth from MZLA, Λεία, the Influence ; assuredly 
from the Influence rightly so called. 

443. And therefore is it customary to say: “ Con- 
cerning children, life, and nourishment, the matter 
dependeth not from merit, but from the Influence." For 
all these things depend from this Influence, as we have 
already shown. 

444. Nine thousand myriads of worlds receive in- 
fluence from and are upheld by that GVLGLTHA, Gol- 
geltha, Skull. 


* Tt is to be noted that this word is MNA, Manna, and is a Metathesis 
of the letters of AMN, Amen, which has been shown in the ‘ Book of Con- 
cealed Mystery” to be equal by Gematria to IHVH ADNI. 


304 KABBALAH. 


445. And in all things is that subtle AVIRA, Απεῖλα, 
Ether,* contained, as It Itself containeth all things, and 
as in It all things are comprehended. 

446. His countenance is extended in two sides,f in 
two lights, which in themselves contain all things. 

447. And when His countenance (ie, that of Micro- 
prosopus) looketh back upon the countenance of the Most 
Holy Ancient One, all things are called ARK APIM, 
Arikh Aphim, Vastness of Countenance. 

448. What is ARK APIM, or Vastness of Counte- 
nance? Also it should rather be called ARVK APIM, 
Arokh Aphim, Vast in Countenance. | 

449. Assuredly thus is the tradition, since also He 
prolongeth His wrath against the wicked. But the 
phrase ARK APIM, Arikh phim, also implies the 
same as “‘ healing power of countenance.” 

450. Seeing that health is never found in the world 
save when the countenances (of Macroprosopus and Micro- 
prosopus) mutually behold each other. 

451. In the hollow of the Skull (of ALicroprosopus) 
shine three lights. And although thou canst call them 
three, yet notwithstanding are there four, as we have 
before said. 

452. He (AMicroprosopus) is the heir of His Father 
and of His Mother, and there are two inheritances from 
Them; all which things are bound together under the 
symbol of the Crown of His Head. And they are the 
phylacteries of His Head. 

453. After that these are united together after a 


* ? Astral Light. 

T Right and left; while in Macroprosopus *' all is right.” 

+ At first sight this seems a contradiction, but on careful examination 
the difficulty disappears. A triangle is a fit expression of the number 3. 
It has 3 angles, it has 3 sides; but there is the whole figure itself also, 
which is the synthesis of the sides and the angles. So there are the 3 
angles and the whole figure itself which contains them, and thus completes 
the Trinity by the Quaternary: in the Tetragrammaton, IHV, and H 
final, which forms the synthesis. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 305 


certain manner they shine, and go forth into the Three 
Cavities of the Skull. 

454. (And then) singly they are developed each after 
its own manner, and they are extended through the 
whole body. 

455. But they are associated together in two Brains, 
and the third Brain containeth the others in itself.* 

456. And it adhereth as well to the one side as to 
the other, and is expanded throughout the whole body. 

457. And therefrom are formed two colours mixed 
together in one, and His countenance shineth. 

458. And the colours of His countenance are symbols 
of Ab (the Father) and Aima (the Mother), and are called 
Diath (Knowledge) in Daath. 

459. As it is Written, I Sam. ii. 3: “ Since El 
Däoth (plural) is Tetragrammaton,” because in Him 
there are two colours. 

460. Unto Him (Microprosopus) are works ascribed 
diversely ; but to the Most Holy Ancient One (operations) 
are not ascribed diversely. 

461. For what reason doth He (Microprosopus) admit 
of variable disposition ? Because He is the heir of two 
inheritances (i.e., from Chokmah and Binah). 

462. Also it is written, Ps. xvii. 26: “ With the 
merciful man thou shalt show thyself merciful.” 

463. But also truly and rightly have the Companions 
decided concerning that saying where it is written, 
Gen. xxix. 12: * And Jacob declared unto Rachel that 
he was her fathers brother, and that he was Rebekah's 
son." 

464. It is written, * Rebekah’s son," and not “' {10 
son of Isaac." And all the mysteries are in Chokmah.T 


* Thus rigidiy following out the rule of the symbolism before given, that 
Chokmah and Binah are contained in Kether. In this is the key of all 
religions. 

T BCuKMTnA, Be-Chokmatha; CuEMTnA is the emphatic Chaldee 
form of CaK MA, which is Chaldee for Hebrew CoKMH. 

X 


306 KABBALAH. 


465. And therefore is (Chokmah) called the Perfection 
of all; and to it is ascribed the name of Truth. 

466. And therefore is it written, * And Jacob 
declared ;” and not written, “ and Jacob said.” 

467. Those (two) colours are extended throughout 
the whole Body (of ALicroprosopus), and His Body cohereth 
with them. 

468. In the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed 
with all Concealments, (things) are not ascribed diversely, 
and unto Him do they not tend (diversely), since the 
whole is the same (with itself), and (thus is) life unto all 
(things); and from Him judgment dependeth not 
(directly). 

469. But concerning Him (Microprosopus) it is written, 
that unto Him are ascribed (diverse) works, properly 
speaking. 


CHAPTER XII. 
CONCERNING THE HAIR OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


470. From the skull of the Head (of Afieroprosopus) 
depend all those chiefs and leaders (otherwise, all those 
thousands and tens of thousands), and also from the 
locks of the hair. 

471. Which are black, and mutually bound together, 
and which mutually cohere. 

472. But they adhere unto the Supernal Light from 
the Father, AB, 4b, which surroundeth His Head (i.e., 
that of Microprosopus); and unto the Brain, which is 
iluminated from the Father. 

473. Thencefrom, even from the light which sur- 
roundeth His Head (i.e., that of Miroprosopus) from the 
Mother, Aima, and from the second Brain, proceed long 
locks upon locks (of hair). 


BUE LASSER ο ASSEMBLY. 307 


474. And all adhere unto and are bound together 
with those locks * which have their connection with the 
Father. 

475. And because (these locks are) mutually inter- 
mingled with each other, and mutually intertwined with 
each other, hence all the Brains are connected with the 
Supernal Brain (of Macroprosopus). 

476. And hence all the regions which proceed from 
the Three Cavities of the Skull are mingled mutually 
together, as well pure as impure, and all those accents 
and mysteries are as well hidden as manifest. 

477. And since all the Brains have a secret con- 
nection with the ears of Tetragrammaton, in the same 
way as they shine in the crown of the Head, and enter 
into the hollow places of the Skull. 

478. Hence all these locks hang over and cover the 
sides of the ears, as we have elsewhere said. 

479. And therefore is it written, 2 Kings xix. 16: 
“ Incline, O Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, and hear!” 

480. Hence is the meaning of this passage, which is 
elsewhere given: “If any man wisheth the King to in- 
cline His ear unto him, let him raisef the head of the 
King and remove the hair from above the ears; then 
shall the King hear him in all things whatsoever he 
desireth." 

481. In the parting of the hair a certain path is 
connected with the (same) path of the Ancient of Days, 
and therefrom are distributed all the paths of the precepts 
of the Law. 

482. And over these (locks of hair) are set all the 


* That is, the locks which have their origin in the influence of the 
Great Mother are interwoven mutually with those which originate from 
Chokmah. 

+ Meaning, !et him supplicate Macroprosopus, developed in the forms of 
Chokmah and Binah, which are summed up in Aima the Great Mother, to 
incline Microprosopus to be favourable. This is identical with the Catholic 
custom of invoking the intercession of the Virgin with Her Son ; for Mary = 
Mare = Sea; and the great Sea is Binah. 


X 2 


308 KABBALAH. 


Lords of Lamentation and Wailing ; and they depend from 
the single locks. 

483. And these spread a net for sinners, so that they 
may not comprehend those paths. 

484. This is that which is said, Prov. iv. 18: ‘The 
path of the wicked is as darkness.” 

485. And these all depend from the rigid locks; 
hence also these are entirely rigid, as we have before 
suid, 

486. In the softer (locks) adhere the Lords of 
Equilibrium, as 15 is written, Ps. xxv. ro: “Al the 
paths of Tetragrammaton are CHSD, Chesed, and AMTH, 
Emeth, Mercy and Truth.” 

487. And thus when these developments of the Brain 
emanate from the Concealed Brain, hencefrom each singly 
deriveth its own nature. 

488. From the one Brain the Lords of Equilibrium 
proceed through those softer locks, as it is written: 
Ps. xxv. 10: “ All the paths of Tetragrammaton are 
Chesed and Emeth." 

489. From the second Brain the Lords of Lamentation 
und Wailing proceed through those rigid locks and depend 
(from them). Concerning whom it is written: Prov. iv. 
19: “The path of the wicked is as darkness; they know 
not wherein they stumble.” 

490. What is this passage intended to imply? 
Assuredly the sense of these words, “they know not,” 
is this, ‘‘ They do not know, and they do not wish to 
know." 

491. '' Wherein they stumble." Do not read “ BMH, 
Bameh, wherein,” but “ BAIMA, Be-Aima, in Aima, the 
Mother,” they stumble. That is, through those who are 
attributed unto the side of the Mother. 

492. What is the side of the Mother? Severe Rigour, 
whereunto are attributed the Lords of Lamentation and 
Wailing. 

493. From the third Brain the Lords of Lords proceed 


UNE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 309 


through those locks arranged in the middle condition 
(i.e. partly hard and partly soft), and depend (therefrom); 
and they are called the Luminous and the Non-Luminous 
Countenances. 

494. And concerning these it is written, Prov. iv. 26 : 
** Ponder the path of thy feet." 

495. And all these are found in those locks of the 
hair of the Head. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
CONCERNING THE FOREHEAD OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


496. ΤΗΕ forehead of the Skull (of Microprosopus) is 
the forehead for visiting sinners (otherwise, for rooting 
out sinners). 

497. And when that forehead is uncovered there are 
excited the Lords of Judgments against those who are 
shameless in their ἄεεᾶς. : 

498. This forehead hath a rosy redness. But at that 
time when the forehead of the Ancient One is uncovered 
over against this forehead, the latter appeareth white as 
snow. 

499. And that time is called the Time of Grace for 
all. 

500. In the “ Book of the Teaching of the School of 
Rav Yeyeva the Elder" it is said: The forehead is 
according as the forehead * of the Ancient One. Other- 
wise, the letter Cheth, Cu, is placed between the other 
two letters, according to this passage, Num. xxiv. 17: 


* The word translated forehead is MTzCu, JMetzach; now if a meta- 
thesis be formed of this word by placing the last letter between the first 
and second letters, we get MCnTz, he shall smite. Hence the first form 
symbolizes Mercy, and the second, Severity. 


310 KABBALAH. 


* VMCRTZz, Ve-Machetz, and shall smite the corners of 
Moab ?" 

501. And we have elsewhere said that it is also 
called NTzCu, Netzach, the neighbouring letters (Jf and 
AN ; neighbouring letters in the alphabet that is, and allied 
vn sense, for Mem Water, and Nun=Fish, that which 
lives in the water) being counterchanged. (Wetzach= 
Victory, and is the seventh Sephira). 

502. But many are the ΝΤΖΟΗΤΜ, WNetzachim, Vic- 
tories ;* so that another (development of) Netzach may be 
elevated into another path, and other Netzachim may be 
given which are extended throughout the whole body (of 
Macroprosopus). 

503. But on the day of the Sabbath, at the time of 
the afternoon prayers, the forehead of the Most Holy 
Ancient One is uncovered, so that the judgments may 
nob be aroused, 

504. And all the judgments are subjected; and 
although they be there, yet are they not called forth. 
(Otherwise, and they are appeased.) 

505. From this forehead depend twenty-four tribu- 
nals, for all those who are shameless in their deeds. 

506. And it is written, Ps. lxxiii. 11: “ And they 
have said, ‘ How can El know? and is there knowledge 
in the Most High ?’” 

507. But truly (the tribunals) are only twenty ; 
wherefore are four added ? Assuredly, in respect of the 
punishments of the inferior tribunals which depend from 
the Supernals. 

508. Therefore there remain twenty.| And there- 
fore unto none do they adjudge capital punishment until 


* And therefore is the divine name of Tzabaoth, or hosts, attributed both 
to Netzach and to Hod, the seventh and eight Sephiroth, as may be seen by 
referring to the Introduction, and to the “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” 
ch. iii. $ 5, annotation. 

t And 20 is H, Ze, in the four worlds, for H = 5, which, multiplied by 
47 20. 


(ee LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 311 


he shall have fulfilled and reached the age of twenty 
years, in respect of these twenty tribunals. 

509. But in our doctrine regarding our Arcana have 
we taught that the books which are contained in the Law 
refer back unto these twenty-four. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
CONCERNING THE EYES OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


510. THE Eyes of the Head (of Mcroprosopus) are those 
eyes from which sinners cannot guard themselves; the 
eyes which sleep, and yet which sleep not. 

511. And therefore are they called “ Eyes like unto 
doves, KIVNIM, Ke-lonim.” What 15 IVNIM, Zonim? 
Surely it is said, Lev. xxv. 17: “ Ye shall not deceive 
any man his neighbour.” 

512. And therefore is 16 written, Psalm xciv. 7: «ΤΗ, 
Yah, shall not behold." And shortly after verse ο: “ He 
that planteth the ear, shall He not hear ? He that formeth 
the eye, shall He not see?” 

513. The part which is above the eyes (the eyebrows) 
consisteth of the hairs, which are distributed in certain 
proportions. 

5I4. From those hairs depend one thousand seven 
hundred Lords of Inspection for striving in battles. And 
then all their emissaries arise and unclose the eyes. 

515. In the skin which is above the eyes (the eyelids) 
are the eyelashes, and thereunto adhere thousand thou- 
sands Lords of Shields. 

516. And these be called the covering of the eyes. 
And all those which are called (under the classification of) 
the eyes of IH VH, Tetragrammaton, are not unclosed, 
nor awake, save in that time when these coverings of 


oIl2 KABBALAH. 


the eyelashes be separated from each other—namely, the 
lower from the upper (eyelashes). 

517. And when the lower eyelashes are separated 
from the upper, and disclose the abode of vision, then 
are the eyes opened in the same manner as when one 
awaketh from his sleep. 

518. Then are the eyes rolled around, and (Micro- 
prosopus) looketh back upon the open eye (of Macropro- 
sopus), and they are bathed in its white brilliance. 

519. And when they are thus whitened, the Lords of 
the Judgments are turned aside from the Israelites. And 
therefore it is written, Ps. xliv. 24: * Awake: wherefore 
sleepest thou, O Tetragrammaton? Make haste," &c. 

520. Four colours appear in those eyes; from which 
shine the four coverings of the phylacteries, which shine 
through the emanations of the Brain. 

521. Seven, which are called the eyes of Tetragram- 
maton, and the inspection, proceed from the black colour 
of the eye; as we have said. 

522, As itis written, Zach. iii. ο: ‘“ Upon one stone 
seven eyes.” And these colours flame forth on this side. 

523. From the red go forth others, the Lords of Ex- 
amination for Judgment. 

524. And these are called: ** The eyes of Tetragram- 
maton going forth throughout the whole earth.” 

525. Where it is said (in the feminine gender) 
“ MSHVTTVTH, .Meshotetoth, going forth,’ and not 
“MSAVTTIM, AMeshotetim," in the masculine, because 
all are judgment, 

526. From the yellow proceed others who are des- 
tined to make manifest deeds as well good as evil. 

527. As itis written, Job xxxiv. 21 : “Since His eyes 
are upon the ways of man." And these, Zach. iv. 10, 
are called “The eyes of Tetragrammaton, MSHVTTIM, 
Meshotetim, going forth around, but in the masculine 
gender, because these extend in two directions—towards 
the good and towards the evil. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 313 


528. From the white brilliance proceed all those 
mercies and all those benefits which are found in the 
world, so that through them it may be well for the 
Israelites. 

529. And then all those three colours are made white, 
so that He may have pity upon them. | 

530. And those colours are mingled together mutually, 
and mutually do they adhere unto each other. Each 
one affecteth with its colour that which is next unto it. 

531. Excepting the white brilliance wherein all are 
comprehended when there is need, for this enshroudeth 
them all. 

532. So therefore no man can convert all the inferior 
colours the black, red, and yellow—into the white 
brilliance. 

533. For only with this glance (of Macroprosopus) are 
they all united and transformed into the white brilliance. 

534. His eyelashes (1.¢., those of Microprosopus, for to 
the eye of Macroprosopus neither eyebrows nor eyelashes are 
attributed) are not found, when (his eyes) desire to behold 
the colours; seeing that his eyelashes disclose the place 
(of sight) for beholding all the colours, 

535. And if they disclose not the place (of vision) 
the (eyes) cannot see nor consider.* 

536. But the eyelashes do not remain nor sleep, save 
in that only perfect hour, but they are opened and closed, 
and again closed and opened, according to that Open 
Eye (of Macroprosopus) which is above them. 

537. And therefore is it written, Ezek. i. 14: “And 
the living creatures rush forth and return.” 

538. Now we have already spoken of the passage, 
Isa. xxxii. 20: “Thine eye shall see Jerusalem quiet, 
even 'Thy habitation." 

539. Also it is written, Deut. ii. 12: “The eyes of 


* The simple meaning of this and the preceding section is, that the eyes 
can only see when the upper eyelashes are separated from the lower ones by 
the lids being raised. 


314 KABBALAH. 


Tetragrammaton thy God are ever thereon in the begin- 
ning of the year,” &c. 

540. For so Jerusalem requireth it, since it is written, 
Isa. i. 21: “ TZDQ, Tzedeq, Justice abideth in Her.” 

541. And therefore (is it called) Jerusalem, and not 
Zion. For it is written, Isa. i. 26: “Zion is redeemed 
in ΜΒΗΡΊ, Meshephat, Judgment, &c.," which are un- 
mixed mercies. 

542. Thine eye: (therefore) is it written “OINK, 
Ayinakh (in the singular number). Assuredly it is the 
eye of the Most Holy Ancient One, the Most Concealed 
of All (which 4s here referred to). 

543. Now it is said: “ The eyes of Tetragammaton 
thy God are thereon;” in good, that is to say, and in 
evil; according as either the red colour or the yeliow is 
required. l 

544. But only with the glance (of Macroprosopus) 
are all things converted and cleansed into the white 
brilliance. 

545. The eyelids (of Microprosopus) are not found 
when (His eyes) desire to behold the colours. But here (it 
as said), “ Thine eyes shall behold Jerusalem." Entirely 
for good, entirely in mercy. 

546. As it is written, Isa. liv. 7: “ And with great 
mercies will I gather thee." 

547. The eyes of Tetragrammaton thy God are ever 
thereon from the beginning of the year." Here the 
word “MRSuHITw, Merashith, from the beginning,” 18 
written defectively without A, for it is not written 
RASHITH with the A. 

548. Hence it remaineth not always in the same 
condition. What doth not? The inferior H, He (of 
ΤΕ). 

549.* And concerning that which is supernal it is 
written, Lam. ii. 1: “He hath cast down MSHMIM, 


* In this section evidently Shamaim is taken to symbolize the supernal 
H, He. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 315 


Me-Shamaim, from the heavens; ARTZ, Aretz, the earth, 
the Tiphereth, Israel.” 

550. Wherefore hath he cast down Aretz from 
Shamaim ? Because it is written, Isa. l. 3: “I will 
cover the heavens, Shamaim, with darkness," and with 
the blackness of the eye (of Microprosopus), namely, with 
the black colour, are they covered. 

551. * From the beginning of the year.” What, 
then, is that place whence those eyes of Tetragrammaton 
behold Jerusalem ? 

552. Therefore he * hasteneth to expound this (saying 
immediately): * From the beginning, MRSHITR, of the 
year," which (word MRSu ITH being written thus), with- 
out the Aleph, A,f symbolizeth judgment; for judgment 
is referred unto that side, although virtually (the word 
Merashith) is not judgment. 

553. * Even unto the end of the year.” Herein, pro- 
perly speaking, is judgment found. For it is written, 
Isa. i. 21: “Justice dwelt in her." For this is ‘ the 
end of the year." 

554. Come and see! A, Aleph, only is called the first 
(letter). In A, Aleph, is the masculine power hidden 
and concealed ; that namely, which 1s not known. 

555. When this Aleph is conjoined in another place, 
then is it called RASHITH, Rashith, beginning. 

556. But if thou sayest that (4) is conjoined here- 
with,f truly itis not so, but (4) is only manifested therein 
and illuminateth it; and in that case only is it called 
RAS#ITH, Rashith, beginning. 

557. Now therefore in this (passage) RASHITH (spelt 
with the A) is not found as regards Jerusalem; for were 
(the letter A) herein, it would (denote that it would) re- 
main for ever. 


* Moses, in this passage of Deuteronomy. 

+ That is, MRSHITH instead of MRASuITH. 

t That is, irrevocably, so that the word would cease to bear the same 
meaning were A not there. In other words, were A a radical letter of it. 


316 KABBALAH. 


558. Hence it is written defectively MRSHITH, Me- 
Rashith. Also concerning the world to come it is 
written, Isa, xli. 27:* “The first shall say to Zion, 
Behold, behold them,” &c. 


CHAPTER ο. 
CONCERNING THE NOSE OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


559. THE nose of Microprosopus is the form of His 
countenance, for therethrough is His whole countenance 
known. 

560. This nose is not as the nose of the most Holy 
Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments. 

561. For the nose of Him, the Ancient One, is the life 
of lives for all things, and from His two nostrils rush 
forth the Ruachin De-Chiin, RVCHIN DCHIIN, spirits of 
lives for all. 

562. But concerning this (nose of) Microprosopus it is 
written, Ps. xviii. 9: “ A smoke ascendeth in His nose.” 

563. In this smoke all the colours are contained. In 
each colour are contained multitudes of lords of most 
rigorous judgment, who are all comprehended in that 
smoke. 

564. Whence all those are not mitigated save by the 
smoke of the inferior altar. 

565. Hence it is written, Gen, viii. 21: * And IHVH 
smelled a sweet savour.” It is not written (He smelled) 
the odour of the sacrifice. What is * sweet " save “‘ rest ?" 
Assuredly the spirit at rest is the mitigation of the Lords 
of Judgment. 

566. (When therefore it is said) * And IHVH smelled 


. * The first, RASAHVN, Rashon, where this word, derived from the same 
root as RASnuITn, is spelt with A. 


Meee ESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 317 


the odour of rest,’ most certainly the odour of the 
sacrificed victim is not meant, but the odour of the 
mitigation of all those severities which are referred unto 
the nose. 

567. And all things which adhere unto them, all 
things, I say, are mitigated. But most of these severities 
mutually cohere. 

568. As itis written, Ps. cvi. 2: “ Who shall recount 
GBVRVTu IHVH, the Geburoth of Tetragrammaton ? " 

569. And this nose (of MMicroprosopus) emitteth fire 
from the two nostrils, which swalloweth up all other 
fires. 

570. From the one nostril (goeth forth) the smoke, 
and from the other nostril the fire, and they both are 
found on the altar, as well the fire as the smoke. 

571. But when He the most Holy Ancient One is 
unveiled, all things are at peace. This is that which is 
said, Isa. xlvii. ο: * And for My praise will I refrain 
from thee” (literally, * block up thy nostrils” *). 

572. The nose of the Most Holy Ancient One is long 
and extended,and He is called Arikh Aphim, Long of Nose. 

573. But this nose (of Microprosopus) is short, and 
when the smoke commenceth, it issueth rapidly fortk, 
and judgment is consummated. 

574. But who can oppose the nose of Him the 
Ancient One? Concerning this, all things are as we 
have said in the Greater Assembly, where concerning this 
matter the Companions were exercised. 

575. In the book of the treatise of Rav Hamenuna 
the Elder he thus describeth these two nostrils (of Micro- 
prosopus), saying that from the one proceed the smoke 
and the fire, and from the other, peace and the beneficent 
Spirits. 

576. That is, when (AMicroprosopus) is considered as 
having (in Himself the symbolism of) right side and left 


* The Hebrew idiom for having mercy always refers to the nose, as “ to 
defer anger " is in Hebrew “to lengthen the nose,” &c. 


318 KABBALAH. 


side, As it is written, Hosea xiv. 7: “And his smell 
like Lebanon.” 

577. And concerning His Bride it is written, Cant. vii. 
9: * And the smell of thy nostril like apples.” Which 
if it be true concerning the Bride, how much more con- 
cerning Himself? And this is a notable saying. 

578. When therefore it is said, ‘‘ And Tetragramma- 
ton smelled the odour of peace," the word ΗΝΙΟΗΟΗ, 
Ha-Nichach, of peace, can be understood in a double 
sense. 

579. One sense is primary, when the Most Holy 
Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments, is 
manifested; for HVA, Hoa, He, is the peace and mitiga- 
tion of all things. 

580. And the other respecteth the inferior mitigation, 
which is done through the smoke and fire of the altar. 

581. And because of this duplicate meaning is the 
word ΝΙΟΗΟΗ, Nichach, written with a double CH. And 
all these things are said concerning Microprosopus. 


CHAPTER XVI. 
CONCERNING THE EARS OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


582. THERE are two ears for hearing the good and 
the evil, and these two can be reduced into one. 

583. As it is written, 2 Kings xix. 18: “Incline, 
O Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, and hear.” 

584. The ear from within dependeth upon certain 
curves which are therein formed, so that the speech may 
be made clearer before its entrance into the brain. 

585. And the brain examineth it, but not with haste. 
For every matter which is accomplished in haste cometh 
not from perfect wisdom. 


UU LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 319 


586. From those ears depend all the Lords of Wings 
who receive the Voice of the Universe; and all those are 
called thus, the Ears of Tetragrammaton. 

587. Concerning whom it is written, Eccles. x. 20: 
** For a bird of the air shall carry the voice," &c. 

588. “For a bird of the air shall carry the voice." 
This text hath a difficult (meaning). And now (for so 
much is expressed) whence is the voice ? 

589. For in the beginning of the verse it is written: 
* Curse not the King even in thy thought." Where it 
is written concerning even the (wnexpressed) thought, and 
concerning the secret thoughts of thy couch. 

590. Wherefore? Because ‘‘a bird of the air shall 
carry the voice." Which (voice) as yet is unexpressed. 

591. Assuredly this is the true meaning. Whatso- 
ever a man thinketh and meditateth in his heart, he 
maketh not a word until he bringeth it forth with his 
lips. (What the text intendeth 4s) if any man attendeth 
not hereunto. 

592. For that voice sent forward (from inconsiderate 
thought) cleaveth the air, and it goeth forth and ascend- 
eth, and is carried around through the universe; and 
therefore is the voice. 

593. And the Lords of Wings receive the voice and 
bear it on unto the King (JMicroprosopus), so that it may 
enter into His ears. 

594. This is that which standeth written, Deut. v. 
28: “ And Tetragrammaton hath heard the voice of your 
words.” Again, Num. xi. 1: “ And Tetragrammaton 
heard, and His wrath was kindled.” 

595. Hence every prayer and petition which a man 
poureth forth before God the Most Holy One—blessed be 
He !—requireth this, that he pronounce the words with 
his lips. 

596. For if he pronounce them not, his prayer is no 
prayer, and his petition is no petition. 

597. But as far as the words go forth, they cleave 


320 KABBALAKH. 


the air asunder, and ascend, and fly on, and from them 
is the volce made; and that which receiveth the one re- 
ceiveth also the other, and beareth it into the Holy Place 
in the head of the King (otherwise, beneath Kether, the 
Crown). 

598. From the three cavities (of the brain of Micro- 
prosopus) distilleth a certain distillation, and it is called 
the Brook, As it is said in 1 Kings xvii. 3: MES 
brook Kherith," as it were an excavation or channel of 
the ears, 

599. And the voice entereth into that curved passage, 
and remaineth in that brook of that distillation. 

600. And then is it therein detained, and examined, 
whether it be good or whether it be evil. This is the 
same which is said, Job xxxiv. 3: “ Because the ear 
examineth the words." 

601. For what cause doth the ear examine the words ? 
Because the voice is detained in that brook distilling into 
the curved passage of the ears, and doth not swiftly enter 
into the body, and thereunto is an examination instituted 
between the good and the evil. 

. 602. “ As the palate tasteth meat.” Wherefore can 
the palate taste meat? Because in the same man- 
ner it causeth it to delay, and (the meat) doth not 
enter so rapidly into the body. And hence (the palate) 
proveth and tasteth it (£o discern) whether it be sweet 
and pleasant. 

603. From this opening of the ears depend other 
openings, (namely) the opening of the eye, the opening 
of the mouth, the opening of the nose. 

604. From that voice which entereth into the open- 
ing of the ears, if it be necessary (a certain part) en- 
tereth into the openings of the eyes, and these pour forth 
tears. 

605. From that voice, if it be necessary (m certain 
part) entereth into the opening of the nose, and from 
that voice it produceth smoke and fire. 


| 
| 


NE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 321 


606. This is that which is written, Num. xi. 1: “ And 
Tetragrammaton heard, and His wrath was kindled, and 
the fire of Tetragrammaton turned against them.” 

607. And if it be necessary that voice goeth forth 
into the opening of the mouth, and it speaketh, and 
determineth certain things. 

608. From that voice are all things; from that voice 
(a certain part) entereth into the whole body, and by it 
are all things affected. Whence doth this matter de- 
pend? From that ear. 

609. Blessed is he who observeth his words. There- 
fore is it written, Ps. xxxiv. 13: “ Keep thy tongue from 
evil, and thy lips from speaking guile." 

610. Unto this ear is attributed hearing, and under 
(the idea of) hearing are those brains comprehended.* 

611. Chokmah is contained therein, as it 1s written, 
I Kings ii. 9: “ And wilt Thou give unto Thy servant 
a hearing heart." 

612. Bmah also, as it is written, 1 Sam. il. 9, 
** Speak, for Thy servant heareth.” Also 2 Kings xvii. 
26, “ Because we have heard.” And hencefrom all 
things depend. 

613. Daath also, as it is said, Prov. iv. το, “ Hear, 
O my son, and receive My sayings." And again, ibid. ii. 1, 
“Thou shalt hide My sayings with thee.’ And there- 
unto all things depend from the ears. 

614. From these ears depend prayers and petitions, 
and the opening of the eyes. 

615. This is the same which standeth written, 
2 Kings xix. 16: “ Incline, O Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, 
and hear; open Thine eyes, and see.” Thus all things 
depend hencefrom. 

616. From this ear depend the highest Arcana, which 
go not forth without, and therefore is (this car) curved 
in the interior parts, and the Arcana of Arcana are con- 


* The three divisions of the Brain of Microprosopus. 
Y 


322 KABBALAH. 


cealed therein. Woe unto him who revealeth the Ar- 
cana ! 

617. And because the Arcana come into contact with 
this ear, and follow the curvings of that region, hence 
the Arcana are not revealed unto those who walk in 
crooked paths, but unto those (who walk in) those which 
are not crooked. 

618. Hence is it written, Ps. xxv. 14: “The SVD 
IHVH, Sod Tetragrammaton, Secret of Tetragrammaton, 
is with them that fear Him, and He will show them His 
covenant ;” namely, unto such as keep their path and thus 
receive His words. 

619. But they who are perverse in their ways receive 
certain words, and quickly introduce the same into them- 
selves, but in them is no place where they can be de- 
tained ( for examination). 

620. And all the other openings are opened therein, 
until those words can issue forth from the opening of 
ihe mouth. 

621. And such men are called the sinners of their 
generation, hating God the Most Holy One—blessed 
be He. 

622. In Mischna, or our tradition, we have taught 
that such men are like unto murderers and idolaters. 

623. And all these things are contained in one say- 
ing, where it is written, Lev. xix. 16 : “Thou shalt not 
go up and down as a tale-bearer among thy people, 
neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neigh- 
bour: ANI IHVH, I am Tetragrammaton.” 

624. Therefore he who transgresseth the first part of 
that verse doth the same as if he were to transgress the 
whole. 

625. Blessed is the portion of the just, concerning 
whom it is said, Prov. xi. 13 : ‘ A tale-bearer revealeth 
Secrets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the 
matter.” 

626. “Spirit, RVOE, Ruach,” properly (is used here) 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 323 


for the Ruach of such is extracted from the Supernal 
Holy Place. 

627. Now we have said that this is a symbol. Who- 
soever revealeth Arcana with fixed purpose of mind, he is 
not of the body of the Most Holy King. 

628. And therefore to such a man nothing is an 

Arcanum, neither is from the place of the Arcanum. 
- 629. And whensoever his soul departeth, the same 
adhereth not unto the body of the King, for it is not his 
place. Woe unto that man! woe unto himself! woe 
unto his Neschamah ! * 

630. But blessed is the portion of the just who con- 
ceal secrets, and much more the Supernal Arcana of 
God the Most Holy One—blessed be He !—the highest 
Arcana of the Most Holy King. 

631. Concerning them it is written, Isa. lx. 21: 
“ Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall in- 
herit the land for ever.” 


CHAPTER XVII. 
CONCERNING THE COUNTENANCE OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


632. His countenance is as two abodes of fragrance, 
and all that I have before said is His testimony. 

633. For the testimony, SHDVTHA, Sahedutha, 
dependeth from Him, and in all His testimony de- 
pendeth. 

634. But these places of fragrance are white and 
red; the testimony of Ab the Father, and Aima the 
Mother; the testimony of the inheritance which He hath 
taken by right and obtained. 

635. And in our tradition we have also established 


* See Introduction concerning the names of the parts of the Soul. 
¥ 2 


324 KABBALAH. 


by how many thousand degrees the whiteness differeth 
from the redness. 

636. But yet at once they agree together in Him in 
one,* under the general form of the whiteness; for 
whensoever it is illuminated from the light of the white 
brilliance of the Ancient One, then that white brilliance 
overcloudeth the redness, and all things are found to be 
in light. 

637. But whensoever judgments ascend (otherwise, 
threaten) in the universe, and sinners are many, leprosy 
is found in all things (otherwise, throughout the universe), 
and the redness spreadeth over the countenance, and 
overcloudeth all the whiteness. 

638. And then all things are found in judgment, 
and then (He putteth on) the vestments of zeal, which 
are called “the garments of vengeance" (Isa. lix. 17), 
and all things depend herefrom. 

639. And because the testimony existeth in all things, 
hence so many Lords of Shields are enshrouded by those 
colours, and attend upon those colours. 

640. When those colours are resplendent, the worlds 
all and singular exist 1n joy. 

641. In that time when the white brilliance shineth 
all things appear in this colour; and when He appeareth 
in redness, similarly all things appear in that colour. 


CHAPTER X WITI- 
CONCERNING THE BEARD OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


642. IN those abodes (otherwise forms) of fragrance the 
beard beginneth to appear from the top of the ears, and it 
descendeth and ascendeth in the place of fragrance. 


* I.e., The various degrees of the whiteness. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 325 


643. The hairs of the beard are black, and beautiful in 
form as in (that of) a robust youth. 

644. The oil of dignity of the supernal beard of the 
Ancient One ( floweth down) in this beard of Microprosopus. 

645. The beautiful arrangement of this beard is divided 
into nine parts. But when the most holy oil of dignity of 
the Most Holy Ancient One sendeth down rays into this 
beard, its parts are found to be twenty-two.* 

646. And then all things exist in benediction, and 
thence Israel the patriarch (i.e., Jacob) took his blessing. 
And the symbol of this is to be found in these words, 
Gen. xlviii. 20: “BK, with the twenty-two shall Israel 
bless.” (The real translation of BK is “in thee,” but the 
numerical value of BK 15 twenty-two ; hence the symbolism 
here rendered.) 

647. We have described the conformations of the beard 
already, in the Conclave of the Assembly. Here also I 
desire to enter upon this matter in all humility. 

648. Now we thus examined all the parts of the beard, 
that in the Conclave of the Assembly (we found) that they 
were all disposed from the parts of the beard of the Most 
Holy Ancient One. 

649. Six there are; nine they are called. For the first 
conformation goeth forth through that Spark of the most 
refulgent Light-bearer,f and goeth down beneath the hair 
of the head, assuredly beneath those locks which overhang 
the ears. 

650. And it descendeth before the opening of the ears 
unto the beginning of the mouth. 

651. But this arrangement is not found in the Most 
Holy Ancient One. But when that fountain of Wisdom, 
ΟΠΚΜΤΗΑ, Chokmatha, floweth down from MZLA, 
Mezla, the Influence of the Most Holy Ancient One, and 


* Answering to the number of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, which 
together with the ten Sephiroth form the thirty-two paths of wisdom of the 
“t Sepher Yetzirah.” 

T See “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. ii. ἃ 31, 40, &c. 


326 KABBALAH. 


dependeth from Him, and when Aima, the Mother, ariseth, 
and is included in that subtle ether, then She, Aima, 
assumeth that white brilliance.* 

652. And the Scintilla entereth and departeth, and 
together mutually are They bound, and thence cometh the 
One Form. 

653. And when there is need, One ariseth above the 
Other, and the Other again is concealed in the presence of 
Its Companion. 

654. And therefore there is need of all things; of one 
thing for performing vengeance, of another for showing 
forth mercy. 

655. And therefore David the king hath sought out 
this beard, as we have shown already. 

656. In this beard nine conformations are found, (among 
which are) six myriads which depend among them, and are 
extended throughout the whole body. | 

657. And those six which depend hang in the locks 
which are beneath the abodes of fragrance, three on this 
side and three on that. 

658. And in the ornamentation of the beard hang the 
three remaining (conformations) ; one above the lips, and 
two in those locks which hang down upon the chest. 

659. And all those six (other conformations), three on 
this side and three on that side, go forth, and all depend 
from those locks which hang down, and they are extended 
throughout the whole body. 

660. But on account of those three (conformations), 
which are more connected with the ornament of the beard 
than all the others, the Holy Name is written in its purity. 

661. When it is written thus, Ps. cxviii. 5: “1 invoked 
IH, Yah, in my troubie: IH, Yah, heard me at large: 
Tetragrammaton is with me, therefore I will not fear.” 


* In the “ Book of Concealed Mystery,” ch. i. § 31, HVA and ALHIM 
are shown to be interchangeable, and they both are FEMININE. And now we 
come to the “ Three Mothers,” of the “ Sepher Yetzirah,” the Great Supernal 
Feminine Triad, which is even BEFORE THE TRIUNE FATHER. I may say no 
more here ; in fact, I have almost revealed too much. Let the reader care- 
fully meditate on $ 651, for there the indicible Arcanum is shadowed. 


MAE LESSPRHOLY ASSEMBLY. 327 


662. But that which we have already laid down in the 
Conclave of the Assembly concerning these words, “' [1 my 
trouble I invoked IH, Yah,” that this is to be referred to 
that place where the beard beginneth to be extended, 
which place is more remote, and before the ears, is also 
correct. 

663. And in the book of the dissertation of the school 
of Rav Yeyeva the Elder it is thus said and established, 
that the beginning of the beard cometh from the supernal 
CHSD, Chesed, Mercy. 

664. Concerning which it is written, “LK IHVH 
HGDVLH VHGBVRH VHTHPARTH, Leka, Tetragram- 
maton, Ha-Gedulah, Ve-Ha-Geburah, Ve-Ha-Tiphereth, 
Thine, O Tetragrammaton, Gedulah (another name for 
Chesed), Geburah, and Tiphereth (the names of the fourth, 
jifth, and siath Sephiroth, which Protestants usually add to 
the end of the Lord’s Prayer, substituting, however, Malkuth 
for Gedulah), Thine, O Tetragrammaton, are the Mercy, 
the Power, and the Glory (or Beauty).” Andall these are 
so, and thus it (the beard) commenceth. 

665. Therefore the nine (conformations) arise from and 
depend from the beard; and thus it commenceth from 
before the ears. But (the conformations) remain not in 
permanence save through another cause, as we have before 
laid down. 

666. For whensoever the universe hath need of mercy, 
the Influence, Mezla, of the Ancient One is uncovered ; 
and all those conformations which exist in the most 
adorned beard of Microprosopus are found to be entirely 
mercies, yet so that they can exercise vengeance against 
the haters of the Israelites, and against those who afflict 
them. 

667. But the whole ornament of the beard consisteth in 
those locks which hang down, because all things depend 
thencefrom. 

668. All those hairs which are in the beard of Micro- 
prosopus are hard and rigid, because they all subject the 


328 KABBALAH. 


judgments when the Most Holy Influence is mani- 
fested. 

669. And when there is to be contention, then He 
appeareth like unto a brave hero, victorious in war. And 
then that becometh bare of hair which is bare of hair, and 
that becometh bald which is bald. 

670. Moses commemorated these nine conformations a 
second time, Num. xiv. 17, when there was need to 
convert them all into mercy. 

671. For although he recite not now the thirteen con- 
formations (of the beard of Macroprosopus), yet from this 
idea the thing depended ; for he did not allow himself to 
enter into those conformations simply that he might 
enumerate them. 

672. But unto the Influence directed he his meditation, 
and made mention thereof. As it is written, Num. xiv. I7: 
* And now, I beseech thee, let KCH, Kach, the Power of 
Tetragrammaton, be great ! " 

673. What is to be understood by ΚΟΠ IHVH, Kach 
Tetragrammaton, the Power of Tetragrammaton? Thus 
is MZLA QDISHA, Mezla Qadisha, the Holy Influence, 
called, even the Concealed with all Concealments. And 
from the Influence that Strength and that Light depend. 

674. And since of this (Influence) Moses was speaking, 
and this (dnfluence) he was commemorating, and concern- 
ing this (Influence) he was meditating, he then immediately 
recited those nine conformations which belong unto 
Microprosopus. 

675. So that they all might exist in light, and that 
judgment might not be found therein. And therefore 
this whole judgment (otherwise, this whole beard) 
dependeth from the Influence. 

676. When the hairs begin to be restrained He Himself 
is as the hero of an army victorious in war. 

677. In this beard (of Microprosopus) floweth down the 
oil of dignity from the Concealed Ancient One, as it is 
said, Ps. cxxxiii. 2: “ Like excellent oil upon the head, 
descending upon the beard, the beard of Aaron." 


me πο η HOEY ASSEMBLY. 329 


CHAPTER XIX. 
CONCERNING THE LIPS AND MOUTH OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


678. THOSE hairs cover not the lips, and the entire lips 
are red and rosy. As it is written, Cant. v. 13, ** His lips 
as roses." (In the ordinary version SaVSHNIM, Shus- 
hanim, is translated “ lilies,” not “ roses.” 

679. His lips murmur Geburah, Severity, but they also 
murmur Chokmah, Wisdom. 

680. From those lips alike depend good and evil, life 
and death. 

681. From these lips depend the Lords of Vigilance. 
For when those lips murmur, they all are excited to bring 
forth secret things, as well asthe Lords of Judgment in all 
the tribunals wherein they have their abiding-place. 

682. And therefore are these called the Watchers; as 
it is written, Dan. iv. 17: “This matter is by the decree 
of the Watchers, and the demand by the word of the Holy 
Ones.” 

683. What is a Watcher? In the book of the dis- 
sertation that is explained from this passage, 1 Sam. 
xxviii. 16: “ And is become thine enemy." 

684. Seeing that judgments are stirred up against those 
who obtain not mercy from the Supernals. 

685. Hence are those stirred up who are the lords of 
the enmity of all things. 

686. And, nevertheless, in each case is there mercy and 
judgment. And therefore is it said, Dan. iv. 13: “A 
watcher and a holy one; " judgment and mercy. 

687. And between those lips when they are opened is 
the mouth disclosed. 

688. By that RVCu, Ruach, breath, which goeth forth 
from His mouth, many thousands and myriads are en- 
shrouded ; and when it is extended by the same are the 


330 KABBALAH. 


true prophets enfolded, and all are called the mouth of 
Tetragrammaton. 

689. When forth from His mouth the words proceed 
through His lips, the same are muttered through the whole 
circuit of eighteen thousand worlds,* until they are all 
bound together at once in the twelve paths and the known 
ways. And one thing ever expecteth another. 

690. By the tongue is the vocal expression of the 
sublime spoken, in the middle nexus of the utterance. 

691. And therefore is it written, Cant. v. 16: “ His 
mouth is most sweet.” And this same palate of His con- 
veyeth a sweet taste; wherefore He smileth when He 
tasteth food (which is pleasant).] 

692. “And He is altogether the desirablenesses (or 
delights)” (of the powers of) fire and (the powers of) water, 
because the fire and water are counterchanged with each 
other mutually (otherwise, are conformed together), and are 
beautiful in his conformation.t 

693. For the colours are mutually associated together. 


* 'That is the number eighteen on the plane of Asiah. And 18 is the 
fourth part of 72. And 72 is the number of the Schemahamphorasch (see 
ante), and the number of the Quinaries or sets of 5 degrees in the 360 
degrees of the Zodiac. And there are 6 such sets in the 30 degrees of each 
sign. And thus we return to the 12 signs of the Zodiac, and these are 
operated on from the ro Sephiroth through the “ 7 paths of the Queen," 
and these again depend from the first 3 Sephiroth, and these again from 
Kether, and Kether is Macroprosopus, from whom backwards depend the 
Negative Existences in their Veils; and Macroprosopus is called HVA, Hoa, 
which = 12, and finds its expression in Aima Elohim. Thus rusheth 
through the Universe the Flux and Reflux of the Eternal Word. 

+ Iam doubtful as to whether this is the best translation of the last clause 
of ἃ 691. Rosenroth has not translated it at all. The Chaldee is MMTaQIM 
VDAI MAI ΟΗΚΥ KDA VCaIK ITOVM LAKVL, Mamthaqim Vadeai 
Maai Chiko Kedea Vecheik Yitauom Leakol. 

+ This whole section requires comment. I must first observe that Knorr 
de Rosenroth in his Latin version has supposed that in the word MCHMDIM, 
Machemadim, fire and water, ASH and MIM, are hidden as in a sort 
of anagram. Now while it is true that MIM can be thus extracted, 
ΑΘΗ cannot, for the remaining letters CaMD will by no exegetical rule I 
know of form a word signifying fire. The following I take to be the real 
meaning of the passage. Chokmah is the fire, 1, and Binah is the water, H, 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 331 


694. In His palate are the (guttural) letters (of the 
Hebrew Alphabet—namely, A, H, Cz, O) formed and con- 
structed ; in the circuit of His (mouth) are they condensed 
(into the palatals G, I, K, Q).* 

695. The letter A, Aleph, which cast forth the kings 
and constituted the kings (ύ.ε., that guttural letter which 
as referred to the First Sephira, Kether, the Crown, becometh 
the palatal letter G, Ghimel). 

696. The letter CH, Cheth, which goeth forth and 
descendeth and ascendeth, and is crowned in the head 
(referring to the Second Sephira, Chokmah, Wisdom), and 
is fire condensed in ether (i.e, developeth in the palatal 
letter I, Yod). 

697. The letter H, He, the golden-yellow colour (other- 
wise, germinating power) of the Mother, Aima, having 
been connected with the Female Power, is extended in the 
Greater Female Potency into the desire of the Holy City, 
which two (otherwise, for these places) are mutually bound 
together the one unto the other (these two are Aima, the 


the Father and Mother Who, conjoined, produce the Son. Now the fire is 
symbolized by a triangle with the apex uppermost A , and water by m " 


these two together united form ex the sign of the Macrocosm, the external 
symbol of Vau, V, Microprosopus. And He inherits the double qualities of 
the Father and the Mother, shown by the word “ delights"! (“ Machemadim") 
being written in the plural. 

* The letters of the Hebrew alphabet are usually classed in the follow- 
ing manner :— 


Gutturals = A, H, Cu, O (R by some). 
Palatals = G, I, K, Q. 
Linguals ΙΙ" ΒΝ 


Dentals = Z, S, Su, Tz (R by others). 
Labials = B, V, M, P. 
The “Sepher Yetzirah”’ further classes them as— 
3 Mothers (Primitives) = A, M, Sa. 
7 Duplicated 0A. D, REP RTH. 
12 Simples =V Z Ca, E EN, S ο οσα: 
In the above classification it classes R as a dental. 

+ This section and § 698, contain references to the Edomite kings and. 
theirsymbology— namely, as denoting the primal worlds which were destroyed. 
(See “The Book of Concealed Mystery," ch. i. § 3; “The Greater Holy 
Assembly,” ch. ii. and ch. xxvi.; and “The Lesser Holy Assembly," ch. x.) 


332 KABBALAH. 


supernal H of IHVH, and the Holy City, the Bride, as She 
is called in the Apocalypse, the final Hof IHVH). (And 
the guttural letter H, He, formeth the palatal letter K, Kaph, 
which 4s referred unto the Queen.) As it is written, Cant. 
iv. 6: “ Unto the mountain of myrrh, unto the hill of 
frankincense.” 

698. The letter O, Ayin (which denoteth the seven In- 
Jeriors which were destroyed) is the medium or splendour 
of mediation (i.e., the internal Light of the broken vessels), 
hath been formed forth in His lips by revolution therein 
{and it hath been condensed in Q, Qoph, which goeth forth 
from the middle of the palate unto the lips). For the 
branches (of the Tree of Life, namely) are connected in 
Him (Jficroprosopus) in the spirits (such as they were in the 
prior world ) formed forth (such as they are in the restored 
world ). 

699. For in the mysteries of the letters of Solomon 
the King, those four letters, A, H, CH, O, are surrounded 
by GIKQ. 

700. But it is written in Job vi. 6: “ Can that which is 
unsavoury be eaten without salt ?" &c. 

701. Also it is written, Isa. xxxii. 17: ‘ And the work 
of TzDQ, Tzedeg, Righteousness (or Justice), shall be 
peace.” Also, Ps. xix. ro: ‘‘ More to be desired are they 
than gold, yea, than much fine gold," &c. 

702. But King David saith, ibid. 11: ‘‘ Also by them 
is thy servant warned.” 

703. I affirm concerning myself, that I have been every 
day cautious concerning them, so that concerning them I 
might not err (i.e., concerning the judgments, Meshephath, 
referred to in verse Q). 

704. Excepting a certain day when I was binding 
together the Crowns of the King * in the Cave of Maranza, 
I beheld a Splendour of devouring Fire flashing from His 


* Le. Tracing out the properties, &c., of the Sephiroth which form the 
King, Microprosopus, and, as appears from the latter part of this section, 
those only in their aspect of Judgment and Wrath. 


ee σοι HOLY ASSEMBLY. 333 


wrathful Countenance of Flame, and with terror I trembled 
at the sight. 

705. From that day forth I ever acted with caution in 
my meditations concerning them, neither have I omitted 
that all the days of my life. 

706. Blessed is his portion who is prudent regarding 
Him who is more ancient than (otherwise, concerning the 
gentleness of) the King, so that he may taste thereof, as 
is fitting. 

707. Therefore is it written, Ps. xxxiv. 9: “Taste and 
see that Tetragrammaton is good,” &c. 

708. Also it is written, Prov. ix. 5: “ Come, eat of my 
bread,” &c. 


CHAPTER XX. 
CONCERNING THE BODY OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


709. THE masculine power is extended through Düath ; 
and the Assemblies and Conclaves are filled. 

710. lt commenceth from the beginning of the skull, 
and it is extended throughout the whole body, through 
the breast,and through the arms, and through all the 
other parts.' 


CHAPTER XXI. 
CONCERNING THE BRIDE OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


711. Unro His back adhereth closely a Ray of most 
vehement Splendour, and it flameth forth and formeth a 
certain skull, concealed on every side. 

712. And thus descendeth the Light of the two brains, 
and is figured forth therein. 


334 KABBALAH. 


713. And She (the Bride) adhereth unto the side of the 
Male; wherefore also She is called, Cant. v. ii., * My dove, 
my perfect one." Read not, * THMTHI, Thamathi, My 
perfect one;” but “ THAVMTHI, Theomathi, My twin 
Sister," more applicably. 

714. The hairs of the Woman contain colours upon 
colours, as it is written, Cant. vii. 5: “The hair of Thy 
head like purple." 

715. But herewith is Geburah, Severity, connected in 
the five Severities (2.6., which are symbolized in the numerical 
value, 5, of the letter H final of LH V H, which is the Bride), 
and the Woman is extended on Her side, and is applied 
unto the side of the Male. 

716. Until She is separated from His side, and cometh 
unto Him so that She may be conjoined with Him, face to 
face. 

717. Ànd when They are conjoined together, They 
appear to be only one body. 

718. Hence we learn that the Masculine, taken alone, 
appeareth to be only half the body, so that all the mercies 
are half; and thus also is it with the Feminine. 

719. But when They are joined together, the (two 
together) appear to form only one whole body. And it 
ls SO. 

720. So also here. When the Male is joined with the 
Female, They both constitute one complete body, and all 
the Universe is in a state of happiness, because all things 
receive blessing from Their perfect body. And this is an 
Arcanum. i 

721. And therefore it is said, Gen. ii. 3: “ Tetragram- 
maton blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.” For then 
all things are found (to exist) in the one perfect Body, 
for MTRVNITHA, Matromtha, the Mother (i.e., the In- 
ferior Mother) is joined unto the King, and is found to 
form the one Body with Him. 

722. And therefore are there found to be blessings upon 
this day. 


Y 


Ar ESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 335 


723. And hence that which is not both Male and 
Female together is called half a body. Now, no blessing 
can rest upon a mutilated and defective being, but only 
upon a perfect place and upon a perfect being, and not at 
all in an incomplete being.* 

724. And a semi-complete being cannot live for ever, 
neither can it receive blessing for ever. 

725. The Beauty of the Female is completed by the 
Beauty of the Male. And now have we established these 
facts (concerning the perfect equality of Male and Female), 
and they are made known unto the Companions. 

726. With this Woman (the inferior H) are connected 
all those things which are below ; from Her do they receive 
their nourishment, and from Her do they receive blessing ; 
and She is called the Mother of them all. 

727. Like as a mother containeth the body (of her child 
before birth), and that whole body deriveth its nourishment 
from her. (Otherwise, containeth a garden, and the whole 
garden is from her.) Thus is She unto all the other in- 
feriors. 

728. It is written, Prov. vu. 4: “Say unto Chokmah, 
Thou art my sister." [f For there is given one Chokmah 
(Male), and there is also given another Chokmah (Female). 

729. And this Woman is called the Lesser Chokmah in 
respect of the other. 

730. And therefore is it written, Cant. viii. 8: “ We 
have a little sister and she hath no breasts.” 

731. For in this exile (1.ο., separated from the King) She 
appeareth unto us to be “our little sister." At first, 

* This section is another all-sufficient proof of the teachings maintained 
throughout the Qabalah, namely, that Man and Woman are from the creation 
co-equal and co-existent, perfectly equal one with the other. "This fact the 
translators of the Bible have been at great pains to conceal by carefully 
suppressing every reference to the Feminine portion of the Deity, and by con- 


stantly translating feminine nouns by masculine. And this is the work of 
so-called religious men! 

T Chokmah, Wisdom, the second Sephirah, is Male in respect of Binah, 
but Female in respect of Kether. This is somewhat analogous to the Greek 
idea of the birth of Athené, Wisdom, frora the brain of Zeus. 


336 KABBALAH. 


indeed, she is small, but she becometh great and greater, 
until she becometh the Spouse whom the King taketh 
unto Himself. 

732. As it is written, Cant. viii. 10: “Iam a wall, and 
my breasts are like towers." 

733. “And my breasts," &c., since they are full with 
the nourishment of all things;* “like towers," because 
they are the great rivers which flow forth from Aima the 
Supernal. 


CHAPTER XXII.f 
CONCERNING THE REMAINING MEMBERS OF MICROPROSOPUS. 


734. THE Male is extended in right and left, through 
the inheritance which He receiveth (i.¢., from Chokmah 
and Binah). 

735. But whensoever the colours are mingled together 
then is He called Tiphereth, and the whole body is formed 
into a tree (the Autz Ha-Chawm, or Tree of Infe),t great 
and strong, and fair and beautiful, Dan. iv. 11. 

736. “The beasts of the field had shadow under it, 
and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, 
and all flesh was fed of it." 

737. His arms are right and left. In the right arm is 
Chesed and Life; in the left is Geburah and Death. 

738. Through Daath are His inner parts formed, and 
they fill the Assemblies and Conclaves, as we have said. 

739. For thus is it written: * And through Daath shall 
the Conclaves be filled.” 


* Compare the symbolism of the many breasts of the Ephesian Diana. 

+ The “Idra Zuta” contains twenty-two chapters, the number of the 
letters of the Hebrew alphabet, of the chapters of St. John’s Apocalypse, and 
of the verses of the rst, 2nd, 4th, and 5th chapters of Lamentations of 
Jeremiah, &c. It is the number of the Qabalistical keys. 

t Notice that the tree of life is the united body, and the tree of know- 
ledge of good and evil the separated. 


. π᾿... HOLY ASSEMBLY. 337 


740. Afterwards is His body extended into two thighs, 
et intra hec continentur duo renes, duo testiculi mas- 
culini. 

741. Omne enim oleum, et dignitas, et vis masculi e 
toto corpore in istis congregatur; nam omnes exercitus, 
qui prodeunt ab iis, omnes prodeunt et morantur in orificio 
membri genitalis. 

742. And therefore are they called Tzabaoth, the Ar- 
mies; and they are Netzach (Victory, the seventh Sephira) 
and Hod (Glory, the eighth). For Tiphereth is Tetragram- 
maton, but Netzach and Hod arethe armies; hence cometh 
that name, Tetragrammaton Tzabaoth. 

743. Membrum masculi est extremitas totius corporis) 
et vocatur Yesod, fundamentum; et hic est gradus ille 
qui mitigat fominam. For every desire of the Male is 
toward the Female. 

744. Per hoc fundamentum ille ingreditur in foeminam ; 
in locum qui vocatur Tzion et Jerusalem. Nam hic est 
locus tegendus foeminee, et in uxore vocatur uterus, 

745. And hence is Tetragrammaton Tzabaoth called 
Yesod, the Foundation (the ninth Sephira). Also it is 
written, Ps. exxxii. 13: Since Tetragrammaton hath 
chosen Tzion to be a habitation for Himself, He hath 
desired Her.” 

746. When Matronitha, the Mother, is separated, and 
conjoined with the King face to face in the excellence of 
the Sabbath, all things become one body. 

747. And then the Holy One— blessed be He!—sitteth on 
His throne, and all things are called the Complete Name, 
the Holy Name. Blessed be His Name for ever, and unto 
the ages of the ages! 

748. All these words have I kept back unto this day, 
which is crowned by them for the world to come. And 
now herein are they manifested, O blessed be my portion ! 

749. When this Mother is conjoined with the King, all 
the worlds receive blessing, and the universe is found to be 
in joy. 

Z 


338 KABBALAH. 


750. Like as the Male (Microprosopus) existeth from 
the Triad (Aether, Chokmah, and Binah), and His be- 
ginning is with the Triad,in this same manner are all 
things disposed, and the end of the whole body is thus; 
also the Mother (Znferior) receiveth not the blessing ex- 
cept in the Syntagma of the Triad, and these paths are 
Netzach, Hod, and Yesod. 

751. And She is mitigated, and receiveth blessing in 
that place which is called the Holy of Holies below. 

752. As itis written, Ps. cxxxii. 3: “Since there Te- 
tragrammaton giveth His blessing.” For there are two 
paths; that which is above, and that which is below. 

753. Hence there is permission granted unto none to 
enter therein, save unto the High Priest, who entereth from 
the side of Chesed, in order that none other might enter 
into that supernal place save that which is called Chesed. 

754. And He entereth into the Holy of Holies, and the 
Bride is mitigated, and that Holy of Holies receiveth 
blessing, in the place which is called Tzion. 

755. But Tzion and Jerusalem are two paths, one 
denoting Mercy, and the other Justice. 

756. For concerning Tzion it is written, Isa. i. 27: 
“Through Meshephat, Judgment, it is redeemed.” And 
concerning Jerusalem it is written, ibid. 21: “Justice, 
Tzedeq, abideth in Her,” as we have before explained. 

757. And every desire of the Male is toward the Female. 
But thus are these called, because hence proceed blessings 
for all the worlds, and all things receive blessing. 

758. This place is called Holy, and all the holinesses of 
the Male enter therein, through that path of which we 
have spoken. 

759. But they all come from the supernal head of the 
Male skull, from that portion of the supernal brain wherein 
they reside. 

760. And this blessing floweth down through all the 
members of the body even unto those which are called 
Tzabaoth, the Armies. 


ο. LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 339 


761. And all that which floweth down throughout the 
whole body is congregated therein, and therefore are they 
called Tzabaoth, the Armies; because all the armies of the 
superiors and inferiors go forth therefrom. 

762. And that which floweth down into that place where 
it is congregated, and which is emitted through that most 
holy Yesod, Foundation, is entirely white, and therefore 
is it called Chesed. 

763. Thence Chesed entereth into the Holy of Holies ; 
as it is written, Ps. exxxiü. 3: * For there Tetragram- 
maton commanded the blessing, even life for evermore." 

764. Rabbi Abba said: “ Scarcely could the Holy Light- 
bearer (i.e., Rabbi Schimeon) finish the word ‘life’ before 
his words ceased altogether. But I was still writing them 
down, and thought that there would still be more for me 
to write, but I heard nothing. 

765. * But I raised not mine head, since the light 
around him was so great that hereunto I could not look 
that way. 

766. '' Therefore I trembled, and I heard a Voice, which 
cried aloud and said, Prov. iii. 2: ‘Length of days and 
years of life,’ &c. 

767. “I heard another Voice, Ps. xxi. 5 : * Seeketh life 
from thee,' &c. 

768. “ Through that whole day the fire departed not 
from the house, and there was no one who could come near 
unto him, because they were unable, for the fire and the 
light encircled him through that whole day. 

769. * But I fell upon my face on the ground, and cried 
aloud. 

770. * When therefore the fire was withdrawn, I saw 
that that Holy Light-bearer, the Holy of the Holy Ones 
(i.e, Rabbi Schimeon) had been taken away from this 
world. 

771. * But having been turned round, his body had fallen 
on his right side, and his face still bore a smile. 

772. * And Rabbi Eleazar, his son, arose, and having 


22 


340 KABBALAH. 


taken his hands in his, kissed him; but I kissed the dust 
which was beneath his feet. 

773. “The Companions wished to mourn for him, but 
they could not speak. Yet the Companions began to weep, 
and Rabbi Eleazar prostrated himself thrice, and could 
not open his mouth. 

774. At last he began, and said: “O my father! 0 
my father! there were Three,* and into One have they 
returned. 

775. * Now shall the living creatures (the Cherubim) rush 
forth (from the Name) ; the birds shall fly upward and hide 
themselves in the opening of the Great Sea, and all the 
Companions shall drink their blood.” 

776. But Rabbi Chiya arose upon his feet and said: 
* Hitherto hath the Holy Light-bearer (Rabbi Schimeon) 
taken care of us (otherwise, hath occupied himself with 
us). Now is the time not fitting for any other thing sare 
to pay him due honours.” 

777. Therefore Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Abba arose, 
and put upon him the sepulchral garment; and who ever 
saw such a disturbance and mingled crowd of learned 
men? Through the whole house ascended fragrant odours 
(of spices brought for the dead). 

778. Then they placed him in the coffin: and no man 
except Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Abba did these services 
for him. 

779. But the lictors and soldiers came from Kaphar 
(otherwise, from Tzipori and Tardaia, or doctors and. 
learned men from the country), and drove them away. 

780. But the inhabitants of Maronza rescued them 
with great tumult, because they thought that he was not 
to be buried there. 

781. When therefore the sepulchral bier was borne 

* Referring to Rabbi Schimeon, Rabba Abba, and himself having sym- 
bolized Kether, Chokmah, and Binah. 

t Knorr de Rosenroth adds a Latin note here to the effect that it is 


doubtful whether this was for insult, or because they were jealous of the 
honour of burying him. 


THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY. 341 


forth, he (i.e. the body of Rabbi Schimeon) was raised above 
it in the air, and a fire flamed around him. 

782. And a Voice was heard (saying): “Come ye and 
assemble together, and enter in unto the nuptials of Rabbi 
Schimeon. Isa. lvii.: ‘Let him enter in with peace, and 
let them rest in their chambers. " 

783. When he was carried into the sepulchral cave, 
a Voice was heard in the cave saying: “This is He who 
disturbed the earth, and made the kingdoms tremble." 

784. How many liberties are stored up in heaven for 
thee! 

785. This is that Rabbi Schimeon Ben Yochai, con- 
cerning whom his Lord was glorified daily. Blessed is 
his portion above and below! 

786. How many highest treasures are reserved for 
him ! 

787. Concerning him it is said, Dan. xii. 13: * But go 
thou thy way till the end be, for thou shalt rest, and stand 
in thy lot at the end of the days." 


Hereunto 1s the Lesser Holy Assembly. 


INDEX. 


A 


Aaro, 146, 328 

Ab, 8, 12, 13, 24, 25, 279, 288, 301, 302, 305, 306, 323 

Abel, 246 

Abraham, 5, 129, 140, 161, 164, 196, 232, 230 

Absolute, 16, 17, 35, 38, 115, 156, 175, 205, 265, 266, 279 

Abyss, 36, 48, 188, 198, 241, 245, 249, 266, 297 

Achad, 7, 12, 22, 47, 67, 117, 137, 139, 166 

Adam, 5, 13,91, 24, 28, 34, 42, 84, 86, 92, 95, 101, 100, 103, 114, 152, 
176, 177, 185, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 227, 998, 229, 239, 241, 249, 
947, 248, 249, 250, 251 

Adonai, 26, 30, 31, 32, 56, 60, 69, 71,88, 89, 96, 103, 106, 149, 150, 168, 
169, 170, 210, 214, 303 

Agla, 31 

Agrippa, Cornelius Henry, 5 

Ahebah, 7, 166 

Aima, 25, 285, 287, 288, 301, 302, 305, 306, 307, 908, 323,326, 330, 331, 
336 

Ain, 16, 121, 266, 280 

Ain Soph, 16, 38, 39, 40, 44, 48, 70, 280 

Ain Soph Aur, 16, 70, 94 

Air, 104, 177, 178, 179, 279 

Aishim, 26 

Alchemical, 27, 155, 189, 235, 289 

Aleph, the letter, 11, 12, 31, 60, 74, 78, 79, 96, 98, 103, 111, 171, 178, 
202, 210, 279, 314, 315, 316, 331, 332 

Almighty, 105 

Alphabet, 3, 11, 32, 34, 54, 63, 79, 80, 83, 87, 88, 93, 96, 108, 115, 119 
180, 185, 264, 325, 331, 336 

Ama, 25, 272, 285, 288 

Amath, 160, 217, 293, 308 

Amen, 89, 90, 110, 168, 169, 289, 303 

Amirah, 150, 151 

Ancient of the Ancient Ones, 21, 28, 113, 115, 117, 125, 198, 196, 137; 


344 KABBALAH 


139, 148, 153, 155, 156, 158, 160, 165, 167, 174, 175, 179, 184, 195, 
202, 214, 225, 233, 252, 267 

Ancient of Days, 23, 111, 119, 117, 119, 123, 124, 126, 129, 130, 131, 
132, 133, 134, 141, 143, 144, 147, 153, 157, 158, 163, 167, 168, 173, 
175, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 189, 191, 192, 202, 205, 218, 
214, 216, 217, 218, 219, 239, 242, 251, 302, 307 

Ancient One, 23, 31, 35, 44, 45, 47, 66, 70, 71, 73, 77, 85, 91, 97, 99, 
115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 127, 129, 190, 131, 132, 134, 144, 145, 
146, 147, 153, 156, 157, 168, 179, 182, 195, 198, 206, 217, 919, 262, 
265, 266, 267, 270, 272, 275, 279, 298, 303, 309, 316, 324, 325, 327, 
328 

Androgynous, 27, 34, 86, 95, 225 

Angels, 26, 30, 37, 53, 103, 104, 106, 112, 149, 171, 172, 245, 253, 254 

Ani, 59, 60, 78, 168, 322 

Apocalypse, 24, 25, 96, 145, 332, 336 

Aquarius, 24, 34 

Aralim, 25 

Arcanum, 101, 110, 113, 144, 175, 185,,196, 200, 209, 217, 224 226, 227, 
240, 249, 254, 284, 311, 321, 322, 323, 326, 33 

Archety pal, 29, 35, 67, 69 

Arikh Anpin, 24, 41, 44, 77, 117, 137 

Asch Metzareph, 14, 15 

Asiah, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 47, 62, 103, 164, 170, 1 , 330 

Ateh, 31, 279, 280 

Ath, 46, 86, 96, 194, 226, 227 

Athené, 335 

Atmosphere, 36 

Atziloth, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 67, 69, 170 

Aub, 32, 33, 73, 74, 78 

Aunu, 256 

Auphanim, 24 

Aur, 45, 48, 168 

Authiqa, 23, 44 

Authiqa De-Authiqin, 23 

Authiq lomin, 23 

Authiqa Qadisha, 23 

Auza, 249 

Auzael, 249 

Axieros, 269 

Axiochersa, 269 

A xiochersos, 269 

Ayin, the letter, 103, 171, 331, 3 


B 


DBanrETHA, 155, 195, 200, 219, 221 
Bath, 286, 288 
Beast, 30, 54, 91, 104, 248, 24 


ODE X. 345 


Beauty, 25, 26, 40, 46, 58, 65, 68, 88, 95, 97, 126, 148, 222, 225, 229, 230, 
335 

Behemoth, 248 

Bela, 175 

Ben, 8, 12, 32, 33, 72, 74, 282, 285, 286, 288 

Beni Elohim, 26 

Benignity, 46, 65, 88, 94, 96, 97, 103, 126, 219, 220, 223, 231, 232, 233, 
234, 235, 239 

Deor, 175 

Berashith, 8, 12, 13, 46, 95, 96 

Beth, the letter, 12, 103, 171, 286, 331 

Beth Elohim, 14, 54 

Bhagavadgita, 18 

Binah, 24, 32, 40, 42, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 67, 88, 94, 144, 147, 168, 
189, 201, 225, 234, 267, 273, 278, 281, 282, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 
298, 301, 302, 305, 307, 321, 330, 335, 336, 338, 340 

Book of Concealed Mystery, 15, 16, 41, 43 to 108, 115, 128, 134, 137, 141, 
144, 147, 151, 152, 157, 160, 161, 174, 180, 189, 191, 192, 201, 204, 
208, 212, 219, 222, 224, 226, 231, 234, 239, 240, 243, 246, 248, 272, 
278, 283, 284, 288, 291, 301, 303, 310, 325, 326, 331 

Book of Formation, 119 

Book of the Revolutions of Souls, 15, 86, 101 

Briah, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 47, 52, 170, 285 

Bride, 25, 31, 32, 35, 41, 42, 47, 49, 51, 52,56, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 78, 85, 86, 94, 95, 100, 105, 106, 164, 210, 233, 
286, 287, 293, 300, 332, 334, 333 

Buddhist, 37 

Bull, 24 


Cary, 86 

Canaan, 100 

Canticles, 74, 105, 116, 141, 147, 173, 181, 186, 190, 205, 215, 220, 224, 
225, 229, 243, 247, 263, 271, 286, 287, 318, 329, 330, 332, 334, 335, 
336 

Ceridwen, 233 

Chaioth-Ha-Qadesh, 24, 56, 104, 265 

Chariot, 104, 172, 253, 257, 261 

Chashmalim, 25 

Chen, 9 

Chesed, 25, 40, 51, 88, 103, 126, 174, 219, 223, 234, 243, 267, 270, 276, 
289, 998, 297, 301, 308, 327, 336, 338, 339 

Cheth, the letter, 103, 171, 309, 318, 331, 332 

Chiah, 35, 40, 53, 83, 92, 228, 299 

Chioa, 30 

Chokmah, 9, 24, 25, 27, 32, 40, 53, 60, 67, 73, 88, 138, 167, 217, 250, 267, 
273, 274, 278, 280, 281, 282, 284, 235, 237, 288, 289, 290, 291, 298, 
301, 302, 305, 306, 307, 321, 325, 329, 339, 331, 335, 336, 338, 340 


346 KABBALAH. 


Cholom Yesodoth, 28 

Christ, 146 

Christian, 25, 31, 32, 284 

Chronicles, 97, 194 

Clef des Mystères, 36 

Commutations, Tables of the, 10 

Companions, 109, 110, 113, 149, 251, 254, 256, 259, 260, 261, 262, 305, 
335, 340 

Concealed of the Concealed, 21, 23, 78, 113, 115, 167, 195, 252, 263, 269, 
283, 298, 306, 316, 318 

Creation, 29, 30, 50, 52, 94, 104, 160, 161, 172, 174, 284 

Creative, 30, 35 

Cremonensian Codex, 15, 210 

Crown, 20, 23, 27, 28, 31, 34, 35, 41, 44, 45, 48, 60, 61, 66, 71, 72, 76, 
85, 88, 94, 96, 97, 111, 126, 132, 145, 149, 156, 169, 175, 17 77, 990, 
233, 242, 243, 244, 948, 256, 267, 268, 269, 287, 289, 998, 294, 304, 
320, 331 


D 


ὍΧΑΤΗ, 26, 59, 60, 74, 100, 180, 278, 288, 289, 290, 291, 305, 321, 353, 
336 

Daleth, the letter, 11, 60, 75, 79, 80, 92, 93, 103, 171, 202, 210, 284, 285, 
331 

Daniel, 26, 58, 123, 130, 141, 143, 168, 178, 182, 223, 236, 245, 251, 289, 
329, 336, 341 

Daughter, 93, 101, 177, 232, 955, , 286, 288, 290, 300, 301 

David, 6, 54, $2, 109, 107, 131, 132, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 218 9E 
326, 332 

Day, 52, 99, 109, 140, 167, 230, 257, 293 

Death, 30, 52, 104, 109 

Débar, 150, 151 

Decad, 26, 65, 74, 99, 100, 105, 149, 160, 180, 214 

Deity, 17, 21, 22, 80, 34, 43, 44, 46, 48, 78, 89, 139, 141, 168, 170, 208, 
335 

Demons, 30, 51, 54, 103, 240, 244, 249 

Deuteronomy, 69, 78, 110, 111, 191, 193, 198, 204, 214, 242, 254, 313, 
315, 319 

Devils, 30, 51 

Dew, 116, 117, 177, 178, 179, 265, 303 

Diana, 336 

Din, 25, 103, 301 

Dinhabah, 175 

Dragon, 50, 51, 52, 53, 152, 237 

Duad, 24, 27, 92, 267, 268, 271 

Duenech, 289 


INDEX. 347 
E 


EAGLE, 24, 75 

Earth, 36, 37, 43, 46, 47, 69, 76, 82, 89, 90, 91, 94, 97, 100, 104, 106, 
112, 125, 128, 150, 163, 178, 188, 227, 242, 248, 249, 250, 289, 297, 
312, 315 

Ecclesiastes, 101, 112, 139, 199, 251, 295, 319 

Eden, 36, 96, 119, 123, 124, 131, 152, 156, 167, 180, 262, 270, 278, 279, 
281, 284, 287, 293 

Edom, 22, 99, 102, 118, 114, 174, 175, 233, 300 

Edomite Boss 22. 29, 43, 47, 48, 85, 102, 174, 176, 298, 331 

Egypt, 5, 6, 176 

Egyptians, 6, 163, 168, 289 

Eheieh, 17, 93, 30, 31, 32, 41, 61, 66, 67, 79, 88, 91, 96, 141, 175 

El, 25, 88, 148, 144, 171, 234, 291, 305, 310 

El Chai, 26 

Elements, 28, 104 

Elihu, 255 

Eliphaz Levi Zahed, 17, 35, 36 

Eloh, 25, 209 

Elohim, 7, 8, 21, 22, 25, 26, 46, 48, 54, 56, 61, 69, 70, 82, 84, 88, 90, 93, 
96, 98, 101, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 124, 163, 167, 202, 209, 226, 
227, 200, 242, 249, 265, 273, 280, 303, 326, 330 

Enoch, 105 

Equilibrium, 16, 29, 43, 44, 45, 55, 57, 66, 71, 13, τὸ, 92, 94, 96, 121, 135, 
136, 138, 141, 183, 225, 242, 246, 266, 308 

Esther, 155 

Eucharist, 269 

Eugenius Philalethes, 20 

Eve, 42, 228, 241 

Existence, 17, 23, 30, 31, 44, 63 

Exodus, 23, το, 88, 94, 107, 111, 117, 121, 122, 140, 145, 148, 150, 153, 
170, 175, 188, 196, 197, 198, 216, 917, 218, 236, 297, 232% 259, 303; 

Ezekiel, 24, 34, 53, 56, 75, 86, 104, 132, 173, 226, 240, 245, 251, 265, 313 


F 


FATHER, S, 12.13, ra 24, 25, 31, 32, 35, 41, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 
66, 67, 71, 73, 74, 75, 78, 80, 84, 85, 86, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 107, 
140, 156, 165, a, 236, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 285, 286, 288, 289, 
290, 291, 298, 299, 302, 304, 305, 306, 307, 323, 326, 331, 310 

Fear, 25, 291 

Female, 21, 22, 35, 55, 58, 02, 73, 84, 85, 86, 92, 93, 95, 100, 177, 227, 
229, 244, 281, 282, 286, 295, 300, 301, 331, 334, 335, 338 

Feminine, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 46, 55, 61, 73, 82, 85, 92, 101, 209, 229, 
291, 230, 312, 836, 384 

Fire, 104, 177, 178, 196, 198, 200, 279, 318, 330, 331, 339 


348 KABBALAH. 


Fludd, Robert, 5 

Formation, 29, 35, 50, 160 

Foundation, 26, 40, 46, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 64, τὸ, 85, 88, 92, 97, 167, 
243, 337, 339 


G 


GABRIEL, 7, 245 

Garden, 67, 82, 98, 100, 131, 152, 167, 262, 278, 284, 285, 335 

Gate, 32, 60, 64, 65, 69, 74, 106, 180, 184, 200, 201, 210, 234, 253 

Geburah, 25, 51, 52, $8, 163, 174, 193, 194, 224, 948, 267, 289, 317, 327, 
329, 334, 336 

Gedulah, 25, 174, 194, 327 

Gehenna, 261, 269 

Gematria, 4, 7, 12, 81, 47, 51, 54, 67, 76, 111, 120, 137, 139, 143, 152, 
155, 167, 170, 182, 194, 234, 277, 285, 303 

Genesis, 22, 47, 48, 49, 69, 70, 76, 82, 83, 84, 86, 90, 91, 98, 96, 97, 98, 
100, 106, 106, 107, 113, 114, 116, 119, 128, 129, 174, 175, 180, 198, 
194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 202, 209, 226, 282, 988, 239, 241, 249, 250, 
265, 284, 287, 300, 303, 305, 316, 325, 334 

Ghimel, the letter, 31, 103, 331, 332 

Giants, 100, 249 

Glory, 46, 52, 61, 65, 68, 77, 88, 97, 125, 163, 168, 221, 222, 246, 262, 
337 

Gnomes, 104 

God, 25, 26, 34, 37, 47, 57, 69, 88, 89, 95, 112, 124, 137, 140, 143, 144, 
150, 151, 153, 154, 155, 169, 172, 173, 180, 182, 191, 199, 200, 204, 
216, 218, 228, 232, 241, 242, 254, 256, 261, 262, 263, 282090] EE 
293, 296, 297, 303, 314, 319, 322, 323 

Golgotha, 72, 303 

Grace, 9, 268, 270, 279, 309 

Greater Holy Assembly, 40, 41, 67, 77, 109 to 257, 260, 261, 278, 300, 
317, 331 

Greatness, 25 


H 


ἩΑΠΑΕΕΤΕ, 111, 202 

Hadar, 175, 222, 234, 300 

He, the letter, 11, 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 
65, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, τὸ, 78, 79, 80, 84, 85, 86, 51, 88, 89, 
92, 93, 95, 96, 98, 100, 101, 103, 107, 108, 147, 171, 179, 180, 194, 
202, 210, 225, 231, 232, 246, 272, 273, 274, 282, 285, 286, 288, 304, 
210, 314, 330, 331, 332, 334, 335 

Heavens, 46, 96, 112, 242, 251, 265, 303, 315 

Hell, 30 

Hercules, 54 

Hermes, 96, 155, 189, 242 


INDEX. 349 


Hertha, 233 

Hexad, 74, 161, 243, 284 

Histoire de la Magie, 17 

Hoa, 54, 78, 79, 130, 150, 168, 185, 242, 263, 268, 279, 280, 233, 291, 
292, 294, 298, 302, 318, 326, 330 

Hod, 26, 40, 51, 61, 65, 83, 125, 163, 221, 222, 243, 267, 310, 337, 338 

Horus, 269, 289 

Hosea, 252, 283, 299, 318 


τ 
ada 


Ippo, 262 

ldra Rabba Qadisha, 14. ^3, 67, 70, 71, 76, 77, 102, 109 to 257 

Idra Zuta Qadisha, 14, 67, 77, 150, 259 to 341 

ὼι.'ι5038, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 68, 64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 
71, 78, 82, 84, 88, 89, 96, 107, 141, 156, 168, 171, 179, 180, 196, 202, 
908, 209, 210, 211, 214, 225, 227, 246, 276, 280, 282, 998, 285, 980, 
303, 811, 314, 316, 317, 322, 327, 352, 334 

Image, 36, 38, 248 

Infinite, 18, 38, 44 

Influence, 27, 6+4, 69, 102, 152, 274, 275, 270, 279, 283, 290, 292, 303, 
925, 323 

Influx, 61, 66, 71, 15, 16, 85, 88, 97, 98, 99, 101, 103, 104, 107, 160, 161, 
162, 167 

Inscrutable Height, 23, 40 

Tor, 103, 194 

Isaac, 236 

Dees, ο ο 77, 78, 95, 97, 108, 112, 116, 127, 129, 180, 131, 
144, 152, 157, 161, 163, 168, 179, 190, 198, 198, 237, 248, 257, 900, 
278, 279, 284, 287, 291, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 323, 339, 841 

_Isheth Zenunim, 30 

Isis, 233, 269, 289 

Israel, 8, 12, 22, 29, 59, 94, 95, 106, 111, 118, 114, 121, 124, 125, 
141, 154, 198, 185, 187, 189, 204, 271, 289, 303, 312, 313, 315, 


327, 332 


29, 


1 
3 


J 


Jaco, 59, 60, 129, 197, 140, 163, 195, 197, 204, 250, 291, 305, 306, 325 
Jehovah, 26, 30, 32, 55, 69, 71 

Jellinek, Dr., 38 

Jeremiah, 67, 71, 120, 123, 124, 131, 149, 161, 184, 230, 336 
Jeroboam, 262 

Jerusalem, 77, 190, 191, 247, 313, 314, 315, 337, 338 

Jesus, 8, 72 

SONIS iat, tol, 153, 188, 201, 215, 218, 380, 301, 312, 320, 332 
John, 24 


350 KABBALAH. 


Joseph, 128, 197 

Joshua, 93, 94, 100, 107, 253 

Jubilee, 107, 180, 288 

Judgment, 28, 41, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 59, 12, 76 
103, 104, 105, 106, 122, 123, 141, 143, 153, 155, 1 
182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 191, 194, 195, 196, 215, 2 
232, 233, 234, 235, 240, 241, 244, 245, 247, 274, 2 
296, 297, 300, 301, 309, 310, 312, 314, 315, 329, 332, 

Jupiter, 27, 104 

Justice, 25, 26, 40, 52, 141, 163, 191, 224, 238, 248, 289, 293, 294, 296, 
297, 914, 315, 332, 338 


K 
Karn, the letter, 103, 171, 325, 331, 332 
Karma, 37, 38 
Kerubim, 24, 26, 32, 34, 35, 172, 340 
Kether, 90, 23, 24, 26, 27, 31, 32, 34, 41, 44, 45, 48, 48, 61, 63, 67, 70, 


88, 91, 96, 111, 124, 145, 160, 169, 175, 177, 217, 248, 905, 200, 267, 
280, 283, 289, 301, 302, 305, 320, 330, 331, 335, 338, 340 

Khem, 289 

Khorsia, 29 

King, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 35, 51, 53, 93, 93, 102, 108, 109, 113, 136, 
145, 146, 149, 155, 158, 159, 210, 211, 218, 233, 236, 240, 248, 253, 
256, 264, 269, 289, 292, 294, 295, 296, 300, 307, 319, 320, 323, 326, 
332; 333, 334, 355, 896, 387 

Kingdom, 20, 26, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 55, 62, 63, τὸ, 84, 98, 92, 94, 96, 97, 
100, 101, 103, 104, 106, 107, 233, 234, 296 

Kings, 26, 99, 43, 48, 81, 85, 88, 93, 101, 102, 103, 113, 114, 129, 132, 
154, 174, 199, 200, 300, 307, 318, 320, 321 

Kneph, 289 

Knowledge, 58, 59, 60, 74, 76, 106, 115, 131, 132, 180, 278, 288, 289, 
291, 305, 310 

Kokab, 28 

L 


LawEp, the letter, 31, 103, 171, 331 

Lamentations, 314, 336 

Law, 8, 59, 83, 109, 110, 111, 115, 129, 140, 141, 146, 160, 161, 162, 182, 
183, 205, 280 

Leah, 59 

Leo, 24, 34 

Lernean Hydra, 54 

Lesser Countenance, 26, 32, 35, 41, 48, 118, 179 

Lesser Holy Assembly, 40, 67, 77, 259 to 341 

Levanah, 28 

Leviathan, 42, 51, 53, 54, 85, 189, 237 

Leviticus, 80, 91, 106, 157, 245, 286, 287, 300, 311, 322 


INDEX. 351 


Light, 20, 28, 36, 48, 50, 51, 54, 56, 62, 65, 66, 73, 74, 76, 82, 84, 85, 102, 
103, 106, 107, 114, 115, 116, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 136, 145, 147, 
148, 158, 159, 168, 177, 179, 195, 198, 218, 219, 222, 223, 234, 255, 
256, 263, 266, 267, 268, 270, 279, 283, 289, 292, 294, 304, 306, 332 

Limitless, 16, 19, 20, 44, 45, 48 

Lion, 24 

Lord, 26, 30, 31, 48, 59, 60, 69, 71, 83, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 94, 95, 96, 98, 
109, 110, 125, 127, 128, 129, 132, 133, 150, 156, 159, 163, 167, 168, 
183, 199, 201, 214, 216, 218, 230, 238, 242, 244, 251, 255, 308, 312, 
319, 329, 341 

Love, 7, 25, 40, 111, 166, 253, 286, 295 

Lublinensian Codex, 15 

Lully, Raymond, 5 


M 


Macrocosm, 36, 41, 155, 331 

Macroprosopus, 24, 26, 31, 35, 41, 48, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 54, 57, 61, 65, 
66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, ΤΊ, 78, 81, 82, 88, 85, 91, 96, 97, 99, 102, 
ΙΙ 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 122, 128, 124, 125, 130, 133, 
134, 136, 137, 138, 141, 142, 144, 145, 147, 148, 149, 153, 154, 1506, 
158, 160, 162, 163, 164, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 187, 190, 192, 194, 204, 207, 216, 218, 222, 238, 266, 271, 280, 
283, 308, 304, 307, 312, 313, 314, 328, 330 

Madim, 27 

Magnificence, 25 

Mah, 32, 33, 73, 74, 78, 79, 251 

Malachi, 112, 148, 195, 232 

Male, 21, 35, 55, 58, 67, 84, 85, 86, 92, 93, 95, 177, 227, 229, 230, 231, 
235, 239, 244, 247, 281, 282, 286, 287, 295, 300, 301, 334, 335, 238 

Malkuth, 20, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 35, 46, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 63, 
78, 84, 88, 94, 96, 148, 160, 169, 283, 267, 296, 327 

Man, 24, 25, 29, 34, 36, 37, 60, 67, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 
101, 102, 106, 126, 127, 134, 137, 139, 141, 152, 155, 168, 174, 175, 
177, 186, 188, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 216, 227, 228, 230, 233, 
234, 235, 241, 242, 243, 245, 248, 251, 259, 281, 301, 305, 312, 335, 

Mantuan Codex, 15, 45, 46, 66, 67, 68, 70, 83, 100 

Mars, 27, 104, 163, 194 

Mary, 307 

Masculine, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 46, 55, 82, 85, 92, 101, 209, 239, 312, 315, 
334 

Masloth, 27 

Matred, 177, 235, 300 

Matrona, 26, 337 

Matter, 30, 35, 100, 112, 165 

Mechetabel, 177, 234, 235, 300 

Melakim, 26 

Melchizedek, 295 


352 KABBALAH. 


Melekh, 26, 

Mem, the letter, 51, 103, 171, 178, 279, 310, 331 

Mercury, 28, 104 

Mercy, 25, 26, 28, 41, 49, 50, 52, 53, δῦ, 59, 69, 70, 89, 94, 102, 108, 104, 
122, 195, 141, 143, 155,157, 158, 160, 164, 174, 182, 183, 187, 191, 
192, 195, 196, 203, 215, 210, 219, 220, 223, 224, 225, 280, 234, 235, 
238, 239, 947, 206, 270, 274, 276, 293, 295, 297, 301, 308, 309, 314, 
327, 329,338 

Meshephat, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 314, 338 

Messiach, 7, 50, 131, 132; 133, 149, 273 

Metatron, 7, 105, 106 

Mezahab, 177, 235, 300, 301 

Mezla, 27, 279, 303, 325, 327, 328 

Micah, 137, 140, 144, 151, 154, 158, 160, 165 

Microcosm, 36, 155, 231 

Microprosopus, 26, 31, 32, 35, 40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47,48, 49, 51, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71,72, 73, 74, 75, 76, ΤΊ, 78, Sd - 
84, 86, 91, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103, 107, 114, 118, 119, 120, 
121, 122, 194, 125, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 196, 137, 138, 141, 145, 
146, 148, 152, 155, 159, 164, 166, 167, 168, 173, 177, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 191, 192, 195, 106, 198, 199, 
200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 210, 212, 213, 214,216, 217, 218, 
219, 221, 229, 294, 295, 226, 227, 229, 232, 233, 235, 236, 238, 239, 
243, 948, 905, 267, 268, 271, 279, 273, 274, 275, 278, 279, 283, 984, 
289, 293, 298, 299, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 309, 310, 311, 312, 
313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 399, 324, 325, 897, 328, 
329, 331, 389, 333, 336, 338 

Mikhael, 7. 37, 38 

Mildness, 25, 28, 103, 169 

Miólner, 302 

Mirandola, J. P. de, 5 

Mischna, 322 

Moab, 310 

Monad, 22, 99, 268, 271 

Moon, 27, 28, 62, 104, 257 

More, Dr. Henry, 5 

Moses, 6, 54, 60, 94, 104, 105, 106, 107, 140 141, 148, 151, 182, 196, 197, 
198, 916, 217, 257,202, 350, 518, 325 

Most Holy ABIO 21, 23, 70, 73, 140, 198, 219, 223, Ην 
240, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 279, ο... 
977, 279, 280, 281, 283, 289, 294, 298, 299, 301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 
310, 314, 316, 317, 318, 325 

Most Holy One, 262, 263, 296, 303, 319, 322, 323 

Mother, 22, 24, 25, 26, 32, 35, 41, 42, 53, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 
65, 66967, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 78, 80, 82, 84, 86, 87, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 
97, 98, 103, 106, 107, 180, 225, 233, 240, 269, 281, 282, 285, 286, 287, 
288, 289, 290, 291, 298, 299, 301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 323, 
326, 331, 334, 335, 337, 338 


INDEX. 353 


N 


Name, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 61, 66, 69, 70, 72, 73, 76,77, 78, 82, 84, 89, 90, 
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 105, 106, 108, 111, 129, 155, 
167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 174, 197, 209, 210, 214, 220, 227, 232, 235, 
241, 242, 249, 264, 272, 273, 283, 285, 292, 294, 299, 326, 337, 340 

Negative, 16, 20, 43, 44, 45, 266 

Negative Existence, 16, 18, 19, 20, 44, 117, 121, 266, 280, 330 

Negative Subsistence, 18, 19 

Nephesch, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 92, 228, 253, 299 

Nephilim, 249 

Nequdah Peshutah, 23 

Nequdah Rashunah, 23 

Neschamah, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 91, 228, 247, 253, 269, 299, 323 

Netzach, 26, 40, 45, 46, 51, 88, 97, 126, 184, 185, 224, 243, 267, 310, 337, 
338 

Noah, 5, 250 

Nogah, 27, 104, 105 

Notariqon, 7, 9, 31, 55, 111 

Numbers, 75, 89, 98, 100, 117, 127, 128, 152, 155, 159, 190, 199, 200, 
216, 217, 223, 265, 309, 319, 321, 328 

Nun, the letter, 60, 64, 74,78, 103, 171, 210, 286, 310, 331 


O 


OBADIAH, 75 

Olahm, 28, 29, 91, 40, 158, 167, 203, 249 
Osiris, 269, 289 

Otz, 28, 267, 336 


Paav, 234, 300 

Pachad, 25, 40, 163, 174 

Palace, 89, 94, 104, 252, 253, 256, 291, 292 

Paradise, 42, 51, 67, 111, 152, 262, 270, 281 

Path, 26, 54, 55, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64; 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 75, 84, 87, 
89, 92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
108, 119, 121, 122, 124, 126, 128, 151, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 180, 
181, 182, 183, 189, 206, 210, 215, 220, 221, 226, 228, 231, 241, 256, 
264, 266 ,267, 269, 280, 282, 283, 293, 299, 307, 309, 310, 330, 
338. 

Patriarch, 161, 236, 257, 325 

Paul, 146 

Pe, the letter, 103, 171, 331 

Pentad, 74 


354 KABBALAH. 


Pentateuch, 6 

Pistorius, 152, 169 

Planets, 37, 104, 105 

Positive Existence, 16, 19, 45, 266 

Potential Existence, 19,266 

Primordial Point, 23 

Primum Mobile, 27, 104 

Proclus, 21 

Prosper Rugere, 8 

Proverbs, 57, 62, 68, 80, 112, 121, 127, 128, 129, 136, 138, 158, 175, 181, 
213, 214, 222, 225, 248, 250, 266, 271, 278, 282,288, 290, 291, 295, 
296,297, 308, 309, 321, 322, 383, 335, 389 

Psalms, 26, 53, 54, 78, 82, 91, 97, 98, 99, 104, 107, 109, 110, 120, 122, 123, 
124, 125, 128, 129, 133, 146, 154, 156, 158, 159, 168, 183, 187, 188, 
189, 192, 194, 199, 201, 908, 207, 218, 219, 221, 223, 226, 232, 236, 
238, 239, 248, 261, 271, 273,274, 277, 281, 285, 291, 293, 296, 297, 
298, 299, 300, 305, 308, 310, 311, 312, 316, 317,321, 322, 339 

Pythagoras, 21, 214 


Q 


ΏΑΠΡΑΓΑΗ, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 19, 14, 15, 17, 21, 22, 25, 28, 30, 38, 55, 72, 
88, 100, 111, 178, 226, 272, 283, 284, 335 

Qain, 241, 245 

Qhphoth, 30, 51, 103 

Qoph, the letter, 103, 171, 331, 332 

Quaternary, 35, 266, 284, 304 

ueen, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 35, 47, 49, 51, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 

71, 78, 92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 101, 105, 106, 107, 149, 233, 269, 330, 
332 


R 


Rassi Arsa, 6, 110, 111, 125, 149, 150, 162, 218, 222, 254, 255, 259, 260, 
261, 262, 292, 339, 340 

Rabbi Benchas Ber Yair, 256, 259, 262 

Rabbi Chiya, 110, 149, 150, 152, 260, 340 

Rabbi Chizqiah, 110, 147, 148,1149, 252 

Rabbi Eleazar, 6, 110, 111, 122, 123, 149, 150, 160, 207, 212, 259, 260, 
261, 262, 339, 340 

Rabbi Moses Korduero, 36 

Rabbi Schimeon Ben Yochai, 6, 109, 110, 112, 113, 122, 198, 125, 126, 

130, 132, 134, 146, 148, 149, 150, 153, 156, 158, 162, 168, 166, 169, 
172, 908, 204, 207, 218, 222, 224, 995, 249, 251, 959 253, 254, 255, 
256, 257, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 269, 281, 283, 290, 292, 299, 339, 
340, 341 

Rabbi Yehuda, 110, 150, 149, 150, 163, 212, 223, 255, 260 


INDEX. 355 


Rabbi Yisa, 110, 149, 157, 252 

Rabbi Yitzchaq, 110, 137, 146, 149, 150, 260 

Rabbi Yitzchaq Loria, 36 

Rabbi Yosi, 110, 131, 149, 154, 252 

Rabbi Yosi Ben Jacob, 110, 149, 150, 260 

Rachel, 59, 305 

Raphael, 7 

Rashith Ha-Galgalim, 27 

Ratzon, 122, 270 

Rav Hammenuna, 133, 256, 262, 286, 300, 317 

Rav Yeyeva, 273, 279, 282, 284, 309, 327 

Rebekah, 305 

Rechoboth, 234 

Resh, the letter, 103, 171, 331 

Reuchlin, John, 5 

Revelation, 54, 189 

Rhea, 233 

Righteousness, 40, 77, 148, 332 

Risha Havurah, 23 

Rom Meolah, 23, 40 

Royal Valley, 59, 53 

Ruach, 7, 8, 9, 12, 22, 27, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 248, 249, 251, 273, 299, 302, 
316, 322, 323, 329 


S 


SABBATH, 122, 123, 240, 255, 257, 269, 310, 337 

Salamanders, 104 

Samael, 30, 37, 38 

— a letter, 103, 171, 331 

Samuel, 88, 90, 98, 107, 185, 196, 197, 238, 251, 291, 305, 321, 329 

Sandalphon, 103 

Sarah, 232 

Satan, 30, 51 

Saturn, 27, 52, 104 

Saul, 234 

Scandinavians, 28 

Schechinah, 26, 49, 55, 103, 111, 161, 197, 246, 250,260 

Schemahamphorasch, 111, 170, 171, 197, 330 

Scintilla, 19 

Scorpio, 24, 34 

Scorpion, 24 

Sea, 25, 42, 53, 90, 125, 144, 147, 188, 189, 225, 241, 307, 340 

Seg, 32, 33, 74, 78 

Sopher Vettitub, 14, 22, 51, 61, 119, 161, 178, 180, 196, 243 273 279, 
325, 326, 331 

Sepher Sephiroth, 14, 15 


356 KABBALAH. 


Sephiroth, 16, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 69, 73, 
84, 88, 89, 92, 94, 96, 97, 100, 104, 111, 126, 137, 145, 149, 150, 
156, 160, 161, 163, 164, 166, 169, 172, 174, 179, 180, 197, 211, 214, 
917, 228, 237, 243, 256, 261, 264, 267, 269, 280, 281, 282, 284, 289, 
810, 325, 327, 330, 398 

Seraphim, 25 

Serpent, 42, 50, 51, 52, 85, 104, 152, 237, 241, 295 

Seth, 246 

Severity, 41, 46, 51, 88, 94, 96, 100, 106, 193, 194, 233, 235, 297, 309, 
329, 334 

Shabbathai, 27 

Shaddai, 7, 26, 88, 105 

Shedim, 249 

Shells, 30, 36, 50, 51, 53, 100, 102, 103, 104, 105 

Shemesh, 27 

Shiloh, 7 

Shin, the letter, 7, 103, 171, 178, 196, 279, 331 

Shinanim, 26 

Sinai, 148, 252 

Siphra Dtzenioutha, 14, 43 to 108, 115 

Smooth Point, 23 

Snake, 24 

Solomon, 6, 66, 94, 101, 102, 132, 204, 233, 286, 287, 295, 332 

Solomon Meir Ben Moses, 8 

Sor, 8, 12, 13, 22, 32, 35, 57, 61, 72, 93, 95, 96, 101, 131, 146, 156, 251, 
253, 259, 261, 282, 284, 285, 286, 288, 289, 290, 307, 331 

Song of Songs, 66, 68, 204 

Soul, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 60, 65, 71, 72, 83, 87, 91, 92, 98, 103, 104, 106, 
158, 228, 241, 242, 247, 253, 323 

Sphinx, 24, 36 

Spinoza, 38 

Spirit, 8, 12, 18, 22, 27, 35, 36, 40, 46, 48, 51, 70, 71, 86, 91, 92, 98, 99, 
100, 101, 102, 105, 107, 112, 114, 131, 132, 133, 150, 152, 153, 164, 
165, 173, 180, 199, 200, 223, 224, 234, 240, 941, 242, 246, 248, 249, 
251, 269, 273, 302, 316, 322 

Splendour, 26, 40, 104, 148, 163 

Strength, 25, 143, 163, 193, 194, 224, 225, 243, 251, 277, 291 

Sun, 27, 37, 62, 104, 148 

Sylphs, 104 

Syntagma, 19, 245, 246, 247, 270, 282, 285, 338 


T 


'TALMUÜD, 53 
Tau, the letter, 51, 96, 103, 119, 171, 264, 331 
Taurus, 24, 34 


INDEX. 357 


Temira De-Temirin, 23 

‘Temple, 6, 89, 160, 161, 233 

‘Temura, 7, 9, 11, 55 

Teth, the letter, 103, 171, 331 

Tetrad, 74, 161, 284 

Tetragrammaton, 9, 12, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 41, 50, 51, 54, δῦ, 56, 57, 59, 
80101159163964965, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72; 73574, 75, το, 77, 78, 82, 
85, 87, 89, 91, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
108, 110, 111, 121, 122, 123, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 140, 147, 150, 
151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 163, 165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 179, 186, 
188, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 
207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 214, 216, 223, 224, 226, 227, 228, 230, 
231, 236, 237, 238, 239, 241, 242, 246, 249, 250, 251, 252, 254, 255, 
201. 266, 267, 283, 291, 296, 297, 299, 304, 305, 307, 308, 311, 312, 
314, 315, 317, 318, 319, 321, 322, 326, 327, 328, 330, 333, 334, 337, 
338, 339 

*Than, 152, 237 

Tharshisim, 26, 245 

Thashraq, 10 

Thebunah, 286, 288, 290 

Theli, 51 

Thenanim, 53 

Thor, 302 

Thora, 210 

Throne, 25, 29, 34, 52, 86, 116, 130, 132, 149, 173, 174, 226, 236, 251, 
293, 294, 337 

Tiphereth, 25, 34, 40, 51, 58, 60, 62, 88, 94, 97, 106, 126, 148, 152, 222, 
225, 229, 230, 237, 243, 267, 284, 289, 315, 327, 336, 337 

Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, 103, 104, 336 

Tree of Life, 28, 98, 104, 197, 284, 332, 336 

Triad, 24, 27, 267, 338 

Trinity, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 45, 117, 149, 266, 304 

Triune, 27, 267 

Truth, 109, 122, 158, 160, 183, 188, 217, 218, 219, 247, 293, 294, 306, 
308. 

Tzabaoth, 26, 88, 246, 310, 337, 339 

Tzaddi, the letter, 103, 171, 331 

Tzedeq, 27, 40, 289, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 314, 332, 338 

"Tzelem, 36, 38 

Tziruph, 9, 10 


p 


U 


UNDERSTANDING, 24, 54, 55, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 67, 71, 73, 74, 76, 80, 82, 
84, 87, 88, 94, 95, 98, 101, 106, 107, 109, 114, 131, 133, 163, 168, 
180, 184, 201, 265, 273, 281, 282, 285, 288 

Undines, 104 ᾽ 

Unity, 7, 12, 22, 27, 39, 40, 47, 67, 78, 111, 117, 137, 139, 166, 226, 249, 
246, 266, 268, 273, 283 


358 KABBALAH. 


Universe, 28, 29, 37, 43, 44, 46, 47, 66, 98, 100, 103, 108, 112, 135, 136, 
148, 149, 155, 159, 161, 162, 183, 216, 228, 319, 330 


y 


Van Hermonr, J. Baptist, 5 

Vast Countenance, 24, 26, 31, 35, 41, 44, 45, 48, 91, 117, 266 

Vau, the letter, 11, 32, 33, 34, 41, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 64, 65, 
70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 79, 80, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 95, 96, 
100, 103, 171, 179, 210, 246, 272, 282, 284, 285, 286, 288, 304, 331 

Vaughan, Thomas, 20 

Veil, 20, 36, 114, 115, 169, 170, 172, 330 

Venus, 27, 104, 105 

Victory, 26, 45, 46, 88, 97, 126, 184, 185, 224, 310, 337 

Virgin, 32, 307 


W 


WATERS, 48, 49, 51, 53, 83, 84, 87, 97, 98, 104, 147, 178, 189, 196, 234, 
279, 284, 287, 289, 293, 310, 330, 331 

Wheels, 24, 52, 104 

White Head, 23, 124, 125, 176, 177, 195, 264, 303 

Wisdom, 24, 40, 53, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 67, 76, 80, 87, 88, 93, 95, 96, 
101, 107, 109, 118, 131,132, 133, 138, 139, 161, 167, 173, 180, 189, 
213, 214, 217, 240, 244, 250, 251, 256, 265, 266, 270, 273, 274, 276, 
277, 280, 281, 282, 284, 285, 288, 291, 318, 325, 329, 331, 335 

Woman, 25, 30, 63, 04, 85, 93; 94, 229, 230, 231,233, 234, 235, 239, 247, 
281, 286, 287, 334, 335 

World, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 47, 48, 52, 59, 62, 67, 
69, 72, 74, 80, 85, 90, 94, 97, 100, 101, 103, 104, 107, 108, 112, 113, 
116, 120, 121, 132, 134, 142, 143, 144, 147, 150, 156, 159, 166, 170, 
172, 174, 175, 178, 179, 185, 187, 188, 194, 203, 204, 222, 223, 228, 
231, 233, 234, 238, 241, 243,240, 248, 249, 252, 253, 257, 259, 260, 
261, 263, 269, 283, 284, 295, 296, 297, 301, 302, 303, 310, 331, 337 

Wrath, 51, 122, 155, 193, 198, 199, 200, 203, 223, 274, 321, 332 


pd 


Yau, 55, 64, 82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 96, 98, 171, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211,212, 
261, 282, 287, 311, 320, 327 

Yekal, 89 

Yesod, 26, 34, 40, 40, 51, ὅθ, 57,59, 00, 62, 63, 70, 78, 88, 167, 243, 207, 
337, 338, 339 

Yetzirah, 29, 32, 34, 35, 47, 161, 170, 251 

Yggdrasil, 28 


INDEX. 359 


Yod, the letter, 11, 32, 33, 34, 35, 41, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 65, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 84, 85, 86, 87 
88, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 103, 107, 108, 171, 179, 
180, 191, 202, 210, 227, 231, 232, 246, 272, 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 
286, 287, 304, 330, 331, 332 


Z 


'"ZAUIR ΑΝΡΙΝ, 26, 41, ΤΊ, 117, 197, 179, 195, 198, 203 
Zayin, the letter, 103, 171, 331 

Zechariah, 125, 128, 167, 187, 188, 244, 254, 312 
Zephaniah, 154 

Zeus, 335 

Zion, 127, 191, 314, 316, 337, 338 


Welicome Library 


Zodiac, 24, 27, 31, 34, 171, 214, 330 
Zohar, 6, 14, 29, 41, 43, 55, 121, 174 for the History 
and Understanding 
of Medicine 


FINIS. 


———— 
PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO. 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


OCTAL BOOKS 


PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY 


ΙΕ REDWAY. 


NATURE AND LAW. An Answer to Professor Drum- 
mond's ** Natural Law in the Spiritual World." 12mo, cloth, 2s. 


** * Nature and Law’ is an answer to Professor Drummond's * Natural Law in the 
‘Spiritual World,’ by one who modestly withholds his name. The writer is with the 
Professor when he remarks, ‘No one who feels the universal necessity of a religion 
‘can stand idly by while the intellect of the age 15 slowly divorcing itself from it ;’ 
he approves tne intention, but objects to the method. The Professor sought to 
materialise the future world, and to establish an identity between this imperfect ter- 
restrial sphere in act and deed with the unknown future spiritual world. His critic 
traces all the laws of earth to a celestial source, without thereby identifying the 
celestial and terrestrial. Who but Time can decide between the two?” —Suxday 


Times. 


PARACELSUS. The Life of Philippus Theophrastus, 
Bombast of Hohenheim, known by the name of ** Paracelsus,” 
and the substance of his teachings concerning Cosmology, Anthro- 
pology, Pneumatology, Magic and Sorcery, Medicine, Alchemy and 
Astrology, Theosophy and Philosophy. Extracted and Translated 
from his rare and extensive works and from some unpublished 
Manuscripts. By FRANZ HARTMANN, M.D., <Author of 
<‘ Magic,” &c Post Svo, cloth, ros. 64. 

**Paracelsus was a high priest among mystics and alchemists; he left behind 
him one hundred and six treatises upon medical and occult subjects, which are 
likely to be read by the curious as long as mysticism remains a necessary study 
for whoever would trace the developments of civilisation, From some considerable 
acquaintance with the writings of Paracelsus, we can say that Dr. Hartmann has 
made his excerpts from them with a good deal of skill; Students, indeed, should be 
grateful for this book, despite its setting of Theosophical nonsense; since to read 
one of Bombast’s Latin or German treatises is a very stiff exercise indeed, unless 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


2 LIST OF SPECIAL BOG as 


you are well versed in his very recondite terminology. Dr. Hartmann has compiled a 
very full and accurate glossary of occult terms, which will be of great use to future 
readers of Paracelsus ; and for so much he is to be thanked, Dr. Hartmann quotes: 
some of his recipes for transmuting metals and producing the ‘ electrum magicum.’ 
But Paracelsus is the most transcendental of European mystics, and it is not always: 
easy to know when he is writing allegorically and when practically. Dr. Hartmann 
says he has tried these prescriptions and found them all right; but he warns the 
uninitiated against running the risk of blowing themselves up in the endeavour to: 
follow the master’s instructions. Paracelsus held firmly to the belief of some of the 
hermetic writers of the Middle Ages, that it is perfectly possible to create human 
beings by alchemical means ; and he even gives directions (in his treatise * De Natura 
Rerum’) for the production of homunculi. On.the whole, however, Dr. Hartmann 
has produced a very amusing book, and a book which will have some permanent 
value to the student of the occult." —3S7. James s Gazette. 


ASTROLOGY THEOLOGIZED, 


THE SPIRITUAL HERMENEUTICS OF ASTROLOGY 


AND ΗΟΙΥ Writ. Beinga Treatise upon the Influence of the Stars 
on Man, and on the Art of Ruling them by the Law of Grace. 
Reprinted from the Original of 1649. "With a Prefatory Essay on 
Bible Hermeneutics. By ANNA KINGSFORD, M.D. Paris. In 
post 4to. Illustrated with Engravings on Wood. Most chastely 
bound in white vellum, Ios. 6d. 


«Τι is well for Dr. Anna Kingsford that she was not born into the sidereaf 
world four hundred years ago. Had that been her sorry fate, she would assuredly 
have been burned at the stake for her preface to ‘Astrology Theologized.’ Itisa 
very long preface—more than half the length of the treatise it introduces ; it con- 
tains some of the finest flowers of Theosophical Philosophy, and of course makes 
very short work of Christianity. Mrs. Kingsford, amid many things which we do 
not understand, and some few which we think we comprehend afar off, gives a more 
detailed analysis of ghosts than we remember to have met with in any of the ancient 
hermetic writers. 'The only pleasing features of the book are the reproductions of a 
number of beautiful symbolical figures with which it is illustrated. That on p. 28, 
representing Christ surrounded by an elliptical glory and carried upto heaven by 
angels, is taken from an illuminated manuscript of the fourteenth century in the 
Bibliothèque Royale ; and the figure of the Virgin in an aureole, on p. 94, is from a 
tenth-century illuminated manuscript in the same library. Some of the figures here 
reproduced are among the finest things in Christian iconography.” —57. James's 
Gazette. 


THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC; a Digest of the Writings 
of Eliphas Levi. With Biographical and Critical Essay by ARTHUR 
EDWARD WAITE. In demy 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d. 

“To the rapidly-extending catalogue of remarkable books published by Mre 

George Redway, of London, an important addition has been made by the issue 


of a digest of the writings of Eliphas Levi. Many people, we daresay, will 
consider the volume to be ‘full of nonsense, but it is really a very curious and 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


EST Or SPECIAL BOOKS. 3 


improving work, going over a vast space of ground, and presenting a great deal of 
matter that is worth thinking over. The author has earned a title to be heard. As 
a contribution to what is called ‘occult science’ the present book will, of course, 
find a welcome from many readers, among those especially whose passion it is to 
grope for the unseen, and to these the varied contents will give delight. The matter 
contained in Mr. Waite’s volume is wonderfully varied, and much of it worth reading. 
even by those who do not believe in magic of any kind, black or white.”—Glasgow 
Herald. 


THE HISTORY OF THE FORTY VEZIRS; or, The 
Story of the Forty Morns and Eves. Written in Turkish by 
SHEYKH-ZADA, and now done into English by E. J. W. GIBB, 
M.R.A.S. About 500 pages, crown ὄνο, cloth, 10s. 64. 


“ In my oL inion the version is definite and final. The style is light and pleasant 
with the absolutely necessary flavour of quaintness ; and the notes, though short and 
few, are sufficient and satisfactory. Mr. Gibb does not write only ad clerum ; and. 
thus he has been obliged to ‘leave in the obscurity of an Eastern language ' three- 
whole tales (pp. 353, 366, and 399); No. 2 being exceedingly witty and fescennine. 
He has the good sense, when he supplants a broad joke by a aza/ English phrase, 
to subjoin ia a note the original Turkish (pp. 109, 140, 199, 215, and 582). Yet some 
of the zovele are highly spiced enough: see the amorous princess in the Eleventh 
Wazir's story (pp. 381-3) ; and the truly Turkish and unspeakable version of modest. 
Aesop's ‘ Countryman and his Son.’ Of the less Milesian I would especially com- 
mend the story of tlie Venus-star and the magical angels, Harut and Marut (p. 167) ; 
the explanation of the proverb ‘Take counsel of the cap that is on thy head’ 
(p. 362), and the Thirty-seventh Wazir's tale, showing why * men have beaten their 
wives since the days of Saint Adam’ (p. 349)— Sir Richard F. Burton, in '* The 


Academy.” 


GEOMETRICAL PSYCHOLOGY ; or, The Science of Re- 
presentation. Being the Theories and Diagrams of B. W. BETTs, 
explained by Louisa 5. Cook. In post Svo, with numerous 
plates, coloured and plain, cloth, 75. 6d. 

* His attempt (B. W. Betts’) seems to have taken a similar direction to that of 
George Boole in logic, with the difference that, whereas Boole's expression of the 
Laws of Thought is algebraic, Betts expresses mind-growth geometrically; that is 
to say, his growth-formulz are expressed in numerical series, of which each can be 


pictured to the eye in a corresponding curve. When the series are thus representede. 
they are found to resemble the forms of leaves and flowers." —Extract from “ Syni- 


bolic Methods of Study," by Mary Boole, 


PHALLICISM: Its Connexion with the Rosicrucians and 
the Gnostics, and its Foundation in Buddhism. By HARGRAVE 
JENNINGS, Author of ** The Rosicrucians.” Demy 8vo, cloth, 425. 


** This book is written ad clerum, and appeals to the scholar only, and not to the 
multitude, Itisa masterly and exhaustive account of that worship of the creative 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


4 LIST OF SPEGTAL Ρος. 


powers of nature which, under various names, has prevailed among all the nations 
of antiquity and of medizval times, alike in Egypt and India, in Italy and Gaul, 
among the Israelites of old and among the primitive inhabitants of Great Britain 
and Ireland . . . . a most valuable auxiliary to all who care to pursue such a subject 
of inquiry, a subject for which Mr. Jennings is the better fitted on account of his 
long and intimate acquaintance with the Rosicrucians, their tenets, and their prac- 
tices,"— An?iquarian Magazine and Bibliograther. 


INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF MDME. BLAVATSKY. 


Compiled from Information supplied by her Relatives and Friends, 
and Edited by E. P. SINNETT. With a Portrait reproduced from 
an Original Painting by Hermann Schmiechen. In demy $vo, 
cloth, τος. 64. 


** For any credulous friend who revels in such stories I can recommend * Incidents 
in the Life of Madame Blavatsky.’ I READ EVERY LINE OF THE BOOK WITH 
MUCH INTEREST." — Truth. 

** Mr. Sinnett’s memoir is fluently written, and is free from unsympathetic 
scepticism. "Theosophists will find both edification and interest in the book; and 
the general student of science will profit more or less by having his attention called 
tOr ας αν Mr. Sinnett, however, offers on all the disputed points explanations 
which will be perfectly satisfactory to those who do not agree with the Commiitee of 
the Psychical Society."—PaZ/ Mall Gazette. 


‘ An admirable study of a primitive belief and custom. One of the utmost 
importance in considering the growth of civilization." 


THE BLOOD COVENANT: A Primitive Rite and its 


Bearings on Scripture. By H. CLAY TRUMBULL, D.D. Post Svo, 
cloth, 75. 6d, 


** A profound interest will be aroused by the keenness and clearness of vision, no 
less than by the wealth of learning, by means of which he follows a line of research, 
tracing through this one rite the cannibalism of savages to a religious impulse not 
essentially different in its symbolical aspect from one of the most vital principles of 
Christianity. In the details of the work will be found much to attract the attention 
of the curious. Its fundamental and essential value, however, is for the student of 
religions ; and all such will be grateful to Dr. Trumbull for this solid, instructive, and 
enlightening work.” —Scotsman, March 14. 

“ Dr, Trumbull has chosen a singular and rather delicate province in the history 
of human ideas..... His book is well thought out and clearly reasoned. .... 
An interesting introduction to a somewhat uncomfortable topic.” 

Saturday Review, March 26. 


THE NEW ILLUMINATION. By Epwarp MAITLAND. 


Author of ** The Pilgrim and the Shrine.” Just published, 32 pp. 
Wrapper, Is. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


MST HOF SPECIAL BOOKS. 5 


ESSAYS IN THE STUDY OF FOLK-SONGS. By the 


Countess EVELYN MARTINENGO - CESARESCO. Handsomely 
printed and tastefully bound, 436 pages, large crown 8vo, cloth 
extra, 75. 6d. 


“ This is a very delightful book, full of information and thoughtful suggestions. 
It deals principally with the Folk-Songs of Southern peoples, Venetian, Sicilian, 
Armenian, Provence, and Greek songs of Calabria; but there are several essays de- 
voted to the general characteristics of Folk-Poetry, such as the Influence of Nature, 
the Inspiration of Death, the Idea of Fate, the numerous songs connected with the 
rites of May, Folk-Lullabies, and Folk-Dirges. There is also an interesting essay on 
what is called the White Paternoster and Children's Rhyming Prayers. This is one 
of the most valuable, and certainly one of the most interesting books which has 
been written on a subject which has of late years been exciting an ever-increasing 
attention, and which involves many important problems connected with the early 
history of the human race.”— Standard, 


THE LITERATURE OF OCCULTISM AND ARCHZE- 


OLOGY. Being a Catalogue of Books on Sale relating to Ancient 
Worships, Astrology, Alchemy, Animal Magnetism, Anthropology, 
Arabic, Assassins, Antiquities, Ancient History, Behnien and the 
Mystics, Buddhism, Clairvoyance, Cabeiri, China, Coins, Druids, 
Dreams and Visions, Divination, Divining Rod, Demonology, 
Ethnology, Egypt, Fascination, Flagellants, Freemasonry, Folk- 
Lore, Gnostics, Gems, Ghosts, Hindus, Hieroglyphics and Secret 
Writing, Herbals, Hermetic, India and the Hindus, Kabbala, 
Koran, Miracles, Mirabilaries, Magic and Magicians, Mysteries, 
Mithraic Worship, Mesmerism, Mythology, Metaphysics, Mysti- 
cism, Neo-platonism, Orientalia, Obelisks, Oracles, Occult Sciences, 
Philology, Persian, Parsees, Philosophy, Physiognomy, Palmistry 
and Handwriting, Phrenology, Psychoneurology, Psychometry, 
Prophets, Rosicrucians, Round Towers, Rabbinical, Spiritualism, 
Skeptics, Jesuits, Christians and Quakers, Sibylls, Symbolism, 
Serpent Worship, Secret Societies, Somnambulism, Travels, Tombs, 
Theosophical, Theology and Criticism, Witchcraft. Post free, 34. 


THEOSOPHY, RELIGION, AND OCCULT SCIENCE. 


By Ilenry S. OLCOTT, President of the Theosophical Society. 
With Glossary of Indian Terms and Index. In crown ὅγο, 
cloth, 75. 64. 

“ This book, to which we can only allot an amount of space quite incommensurate 
with its intrinsic interest, is one that will appeal to the prepared student rather than 
tothe general reader. To any one who has previously made the acquaintance of 
such books as Mr. Sinnett's ‘Occult World’ and ‘ Esoteric Buddhism,’ or has in 
other ways familiarised himself with the doctrines of the so-called Theosophical 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


© LIST OF SPECIAL ρου. 


‘Society or Brotherhood, these lectures of Colonel Olcott’s will be rich in interest and 
suggestiveness. The American officer is a person of undoubted social position and 
unblemished personal reputation, and his main object is not to secure belief in the 
reality of any ‘phenomena,’ -not to win a barren reputation for himself as a 
thaumaturgist or wonder-worker, but to win acceptance for one of the oldest 
philosophies of nature and human life—a philosophy to which of late years the 
thinkers of the West have been turning with noteworthy curiosity and interest. Of 
course, should the genuineness of the phenomena in question be satisfactorily estab- 
lished, there would undoubtedly be proof that the Eastern sages to whom Colonel 
Olcott bears witness do possess a knowledge of the laws of the physical universe far 
wider and more intimate than that which has been laboriously acquired by the in- 
ductive science of the West ; but the theosophy expounded in this volume is at once 
a theology, a metaphysic, and a sociology, in which mere marvels, as such, occupy 
a quite subordinate and unimportant position. We cannot now discuss its claims 
and we will not pronounce any opinion upon them ; we will only say that Colonel 
Olcott's volume deserves and will repay the study of all readers for whom the bye- 
ways of speculation have an irresistible charm.” — Manchester Examiner. 


TRANSACTIONS OF THE LONDON LODGE OF THE 
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY. 


Nos. 1 and 2.—Out of print. 
No. 3.—On the Higher Aspect of Theosophic Studies. By Mo- 
HINI M. CHATTERJI. 
No. 4.—A Synopsis of Baron Du Prel's ** Philosophie der Mystik." 
By BERTRAM KEIGHTLEY. 
No. 5.—A Paper on Re-incarnation. By Miss ARUNDALE. And 
other Proceedings. 
No. 6.—The Theosophical Movement. By A. P. SINNETT. 
No. 7.—The Higher Self. By A. P. SINNETT. 
No. 8.—The Theosophical Society and its Work. By MOHINI 
M. CHATTERJI. 
No. 9.—A Paper on Krishna. By MOHINI M. CHATTERJI. 
No. 10.—On Mesmerism. By A. P. SINNETT. 
No. 11.—Theosophy in the Works of Richard Wagner. By 
W. ASHTON ELLIS. 


Nos. 3 to 11, and each succeeding number as issued, may be had, 
price One Shilling. 


SITHRON, THE STAR-STRICKEN. Translated (A/a 


bereket Allah) from an Ancient Arabic Manuscript. By SALEM 
BEN Uzirm, of Bassora. In large crown Svo, 35. 6d. 


“Tais very remarkable book, 'Sithron, . .. . is a bold, pungent, audacious 
.satire upon the ancient religious belief of the Jews. . . .. No one can read the 
.book without homage to the force, the tenderness, and the never-failing skill of its 
writer. —Sż, James's Gazette. 


."GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN, 


i57 OF SPECIAL BOOKS. 7 


PRIMITIVE SYMBOLISM AS ILLUSTRATED IN 


PHALLIC WORSHIP; or, The Reproductive Principle. By the late 
ΗΟΡΡΕΕ M. ΊΝΨΕΞΊΚΟΡΡ. With an Introduction by Major-General 
FORLONG, Author of ‘‘ Rivers of Life.” In demy 8vo, choicely 
printed, and bound in cloth or Japanese parchment, 75. 62. 


“ This work is a mudtum in parvo of the growth and spread of Phallicism, as we 
commonly call the worship of nature or fertilising powers. I felt, when solicited to 
erlarge and illustrate it on the sudden death of the lamented author, that it would 
be desecration to touch so complete a compendium by one of the most cempetent and 
soundest thinkers who have written on this world-wide faith. None knew better or 
saw more clearly than Mr. Westropp that in this oldest symbolism and worship lay 
the foundations of all the goodly systems we call religions."— J. G. R. Fortona. 

** A well-selected repertory of facts illustrating this subject, which should be read 
by all who are interested in the study of the growth of religions." 

Westminster Review. 


POPE JOAN (The Female Pope). A Historical Study. 


Translated from the Greek of Emmanuel Rhoidis, with Preface by 
CHARLES HASTINGS COLLETTE. In small 8vo, handsomely 
printed on antique paper, and tastefully bound, 25. 64. 


“When Dr. Dollinger wrote to the effect that ‘the subject of Pope Joan has not 
yet lost interest,’ he said no more than the truth. The probability is that the topic 
will always have its attractions for the lovers of the curiosities of history. Mr. 
Baring-Gould has declared that ‘the whole story of Pope Joan is fabulous, and rests 
on not a single historical foundation ; but others are not so firmly convinced in the 
matter, and at all times there are those who are anxious to investigate singular 
traditions. . . e . Rhoidis discusses the topic with much learning and ingenuity, and 
Mr. Collette's introduction is full of information.” —G lobe. 

*' It is interesting enough, and is accompanied by curious illustrations.” 

Notes and Queries, 


THE “OCCULT WORLD PHENOMENA” AND THE 
SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH. By A. P. SINNETT, 
Author of **The Occult World,” **Esoteric Buddhism," &c. With 
a Protest by Madame BLAVATSKY. 64 pp. 8vo, wrapper, Is. 64. 


** An interesting addition to the fast-expanding literature of Theosophy.” 
Literary World. 

** All who are interested in Theosophy should read it.”—Glasgow Herald. 

“ Mr. Sinnett scores some points against his adversary, and his pamphlet is to be 
followed by some memoirs of Madame Blavatsky, which may contain further re- 
futations. Madame Blavatsky herself appends to the pamphlet a brief and ir.2ignant 
denial of the grave charges which have been made against her.” — Graphic. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


8 LIST OF SPECIAL OBSS. 


POSTHUMOUS HUMANITY : a Study of Phantoms. By 


ADOLPHE D'AssiER, Member of the Bordeaux Academy of Sciences, 
Translated and Annotated by HENRY S. OLCOTT, President of 
the Theosophical Society. Only Authorised Translation. 

[Zn the press. 


CONTENTS :—Introduction—Chapter I. Facts establishing the existence of the 
posthumous personality in man—Its various modes of manifestation—II. Facts estab- 
lishing the existence of a second personality in the living man— Its various modes of 
manifestation—III. Facts establishing the existence of the personality in animals, 
and concerning a posthumous animality—Fluidic form of vegetables— Fluidic form 
of gross bodies—IV. Character of the posthumous being—Its physical constitution 
—Its aversion for light—Its reservoir of active forces—Its ballistic—V. The nervous 
fluid—Electrical animals—Electrical persons—Electrical plants—VI. The mesmeric 
ether and the personality which it engenders —The somnambule —The sleep-talker 
—The seer—VII. The mesmeric ether and the personality which it engenders con- 
Zinued —The turning-table— The talking-table—The medium—VIII. The mesmeric 
ether and the personality which it engenders (coztinued)—Miracles of the ecstatics 
IX. The mesmeric ether and the personality which it engenders (continued — Pro- 
digy of magic—X. The mesmeric ether and the personality which it engenders 
(continued)\—The incubus—The obsessing spirit—XI. Causes of the rarity of the 
living phantom—Causes of the rarity of the trans-sepulchral phantom—Resemblance 
between the phenomena of spiritism and the phenomena of the posthumous order— 
Lycanthropy—XII. Glance at the ghostly fauna—Their pre-occupations—How they 
prolong their existence—The posthumous vampire. 


THE HISTORY OF THE ROSICRUCIANS. Founded on 


their own AManifestoes, and on Facts and Documents collected from 
the Writings of Initiated Members. By ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE, 
Author of “The Mysteries of Magic: a Digest of the Writings of 
Eliphas Lévi,” In crown ὄνο, 450 pp., with Illustrations and 
Historico-symbolical binding. 75. 64. 


The facts and documents concerning the secret and mysterious fraternity of the 
Rose-Cross, or of the Golden and Rosy Cross, are absolutely unknown to English 
readers. Even well-informed people will learn with astonishment the extent and 
variety of the Rosicrucian literature which hitherto has lain buried in rare pamphlets, 
written in the old German tongue, and in the Latin commentaries of the later 
alchemists. The stray gleams of casual information which may be gleaned from 
popular encyclopzedias cannot be said to convey any real knowledge, while the essay 
of Thomas De Quincey on '* The Rosicrucians and Freemasons,” though valuable as 
the work of a sovereign prince of English prose compesition, is a mere transcript 
from an exploded German savant, whose facts are tortured in the interests of a some- 
what arbitrary hypothesis. 


In our own day, a few writers on mystical subjects have ignorantly connected the 
Rosicrucians with Phallicism and Serpent Worship, and by this connection have 
ascribed to them an antiquity which has no historical foundation, and which their 
most authoritative documents themselves disclaim. 


GEORGE REDWAY, r5 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN, 


ΤΟ SPECIAL BOOKS. 9 


'The profound interest now manifested in all branches of mysticism, the tendency, 
in particular, of many cultured minds towards those metaphysical conceptions which 
are at the base of the alchemical system, the very general suspicion that other 
secrets than that of manufacturing gold are to be found in the Pandora's Box of 
Hermetic and Rosicrucian allegories, make it,evident that the time has come to 
collect the mass of material which exists for the elucidation of this curious problem 
of Europeau history. 


In the present work every important and available fact has been carefully 
collected, and the manifestoes and other documents of the Fraternity are repub- 
lished in revised versions. The Rosicrucians, as represented by themselves, are 
therefore offered to English readers for the first time in the literature of the sub- 
ject. The task has been performed by a sympathetic but impartial writer, purged 
Jrom the bias of any particular theory, aud above all uncontaminated by the 
pretension to superior knowledge which claimants have never been able to sub- 
stantiate. 


The history of the Rose in symbolism and of the Cross in symbolism, with the 
secret significance of their union, is exhaustively discussed in the Introduction, 
which is followed by a brief review of the state of Mystical Philosophy in Germany 
at the close of the sixteenth century, and just before the first appearance of the 
Fraternity in Europe. 


In the succeeding divisions of the work will be found translations of ‘‘ The 
Universal Reformation of the Whole Wide World ;" the “Fama Fraternitatis, or, 
Discovery of the meritorious order of the R. C.;" the “ Confessio Fraternitatis R.C. 
ad Eruditos Europa ;" and the remarkable Hermetic romance entitled **The 
Chymical Marriage of Christian Rosencreutz," containing the mystical and sym- 
bolical history of an artist or prepared student, who, axxo 1459, was supernaturally 
and magically elected to be present at the accomplishment of the Magnum Opus. 


The philosophical and scientific doctrines developed in these documents are com- 
pared with the magical theorems of Paracelsus, and the historical traces of the 
Rosicrucians in early times are appreciated at their true value. Every accredited 
theory as to the authorship and character of the manifestoes is impartially and 
adequately discussed, particularly the claim which has been advanced by Arnold, 
Herder, Buhle, and other authorities, in favour of Johann Valentin Andreas. 


The succeeding chapters comprise: I. A historical and bibliographical account 
of the immediate result of the manifestoes in Germany, with abstracts of the 
Rosicrucian and anti-Rosicrucian publications during the first quarter of the seven- 
teenth century. These abstracts include the ‘‘Echo of the God-illuminated 
Fraternity of the worthy order R. C.,” the *‘ Confessio Recepta," “Rosa Florescens,’” 
“Fama e Scanzia Redux," the pamphlets of Julianus de Campis, Andrew 
Libavius, &c. II. Historical and biographical sketches of the representative 
Rosicrucian apologists—namely, Michael Maiér, Robert Fludd, Thomas Vaughan, 
and John Heydon, with an account of their philosophical opinions, and a complete 
history of the Rosicrucians in England, comprising the extraordinary Heydon docu- 
merts—namely, **'T'he Rosie Cross uncovered, and the places, temples, holy houses, 
castles, and invisible mountains of the brethren discovered and communicated to the 
world," the allegorical voyage of John Heydon, &c. &c. III. A short history of 
Rosicrucianism in France, IV. An essay on the connection between the Rosicru- 
cians and the Freemasons, V. The influence of Rosicrucian ideas upon literature 
and legend. 


Where necessary the text is supplemented by elucidatory notes. 


GEORGE REDWAY, "s YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


ιο LIST OF SPECIAL BOGE. 


THE THEOSOPHIST. A Magazine of Oriental Philo- 
sophy, Art, Literature, and Occultism. Conducted by H. P. 


BLAVATSKY. Monthly, 2s. ; Yearly Subscription, 205. 
[ Vols. I. to VIII. now ready. 


**'Theosophy has suddenly risen toimportance. . . . . The movement implied by 
the term Theosophy is one that cannot be adequately explained in a few words. 
e . . . Those interested in the movement, which is not to be confounded with spint- 
ualism, will find means of gratifying their curiosity by procuring the back numbers 
of The Theosophist, and a very remarkable book called Zsis Unveiled, by Madame 
Blavatsky,” — Literary World. 


THE SCOPE AND CHARM OF ANTIQUARIAN STUDY. 
By JOHN Barry, F.R.Hist.S., Member of the Yorkshire Archæ- 
ological and Topographical Association. In demy Svo, elegantly 
printed an Dutch hand-made paper, and bound in parchment- 
paper cover, Is. 


“It forms a useful and entertaining guide to a beginner in historical res 
Notes and Queries. 

“The author has laid it before the public in a most inviting, intelligent, and in- 
telligible form, and offers every incentive to the study in every department, including 
Ancient Records, Manorial Court-Rolls, Heraldry, Painted Glass, Mural Paintings, 
Pottery, Church Bells, Numismatics, Folk-Lore, &c., to each of which the attention 
of the student is directed. The pamphlet is printed on a beautiful modern antique 
paper, appropriate to the subject of the work." —Brighton Examiner. 

** Mr. Batty, who is one of those folks Mr. Dobson styles ‘ gleaners after time, 
has clearly and concisely summed up, in the space of a few pages, all the various 
objects which may legitimately be considered to come within the scope of anti- 
quarian study.” —Academy. 


CONFESSIONS OF AN ENGLISH HACHISH EATER. 


An édition de luxe, in demy 18mo, Is. 


‘*There is a sort of bizarre attraction in this fantastic little book, with its weird, 
unhealthy imaginations.” — Whitehall Review. 

** Imagination or some other faculty plays marvellous freaks in this little book.”— 
Lloyd’s Weekly. 

“ A weird little book. . . . . The author seems to have been delighted with his 
dreams, and . . . . carefully explains how hachish may be made from the resin of 
the common hemp plant."—2a:Zy Chronicle. 

“To be added to the literature of what is, after all, a very undesirable subject. 
Weak minds may generate a morbid curiosity if stimulated in this direction."— 
Bradford Observer. 

“ The stories told by our author have a decidedly Oriental flavour, and we would 
not be surprised if some foolish individuals did endeavour to procure some of the 
drug, with a view to experience the sensation described by the writer of this 
clever érochure."—Edinburgh Courant. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


αμ ος SPECIAL BOOKS 11 


ΤΗΕ HANDBOOK OF PALMISTRY. By Rosa Baucuan, 


Author of “Indications of Character in Handwriting.” Fourth 
Edition, newly revised, in demy 8vo, with Illustrative Plates, Is. 

** It possesses a certain literary interest, for Miss Baughan shows the connection 
between palmistry and the doctrines of the Kabbala.” — Graphic. 

** Miss Rosa Baughan, for many years known as one of the most expert proficients 
in this branch of science, has as much claim to consideration as any writer on the 
subject,” —Sussex Daily News. 

* People who wish to believe in palmistry, or the science of reading character 
from the marks of the hand," says the Daily News, in an article devoted to the 
discussion of this topic, * will be interested in a handbook of the subject by Miss 
Baughan, published by Mr. Redway." 


THE ASTROLOGER'S GUIDE. 


ANIMA ASTROLOGIAE; or, A Guide for Astrologers. 
Being the One Hundred and Forty-six Considerations of the 
Astrologer, GUIDO BONATUS, translated from the Latin by HENRY 
COLEY, together with the choicest Aphorisms of the Seven Segments 
of JEROM CARDAN, of Milan, edited by William Lilly (1675); 
now first republished from the original edition, with Notes and 
Preface. By W. C. ELDON SERJEANT. Edition limited to 500 
copies, handsomely printed on antique paper and tastefully bound, 
75. 6d. 

** Mr. Serjeant deserves the thanks of all who are interested in astrology for res- 
cuing this important work from oblivion. . . .. The growing interest in mystical 
science will lead*to a revival of astrological study, and advanced students will find 


this book an indispensable addition to their libraries, The book is well got up and 
printed." — Theosophist. 


BIBLIOTHECA CURIOSA. 


A TREATISE OF MAGIC INCANTATIONS. Trans- 


lated from the Latin of CHRISTIANUS ΡΑΖΙΟ (circa 1700). Edited 
by EDMUND GOLDsMID, F. R. H. S.,F.S. A. (Scot.) Only 350 copies 
printed. 45. 67. 


This little parchment-covered treatise of some sixty pages, most daintily printed, 
gives a detailed and curious account of magic in general, and of incantations by 
formula and by word. From sacred and profane literature he draws his evidence of 
widespread belief in that which survives in Suffolk to-day. Respecting the cure of 
ailments by incantation, and of the transference of those ailments to others, there is 
quite a body of evidence, or rather statement. 


HERMES TRISMEGISTUS. The Theological and Philo- 


sophical Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Christian Neopiatonist. 
Translated from the Original Greek, with Preface, Notes, and 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 York ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


T2 LIST OF SPECIAL BOOKS. 


Indices. By Joun DAVID CHAMBERS, M.A., F.S.A., of Oriel 
College, Oxford, Recorder of New Sarum. 8vo, cloth, 7s. θά. 


‘The book is most scholarly and learned, and of great value for its collation of 
the Bible, Plato, and other Scriptures with the Hermetic, showing one system of 
thought as pervading them all. He comes to the conclusion—which we also enter- 
tain—that the so-called Hermetic books, while representing, in part, ancient Egyptian 
doctrine, belong to an early Christian—or perhaps slightly prz-Christian— period, 
and are intended to show the identity of the outgoing and incoming systems, and 
bridge over the gap between them, if any. He omits the Virgin of the World, as 
belonging to some other school, and also the Asclepius, or Treatise on Initiation, so 
that the book does not supersede that which we translated and edited. The author, 
or rather editor, is not an occultist, but, barring this element, his work is a great 
addition to Hermetic literature," — Opinion of the Authors of “The Perfect Way.” 


THE HANDBOOK OF PHYSIOGNOMY. By Rosa 


BauGHAN. Demy 8vo, wrapper, Is. 


**'The merit of her book consists in the admirable clearness of her descriptions of 
faces. So vivid is the impression produced by thein that she is able to dispense with 
illustrations, the reader using the faces of his acquaintances for that purpose. The 
classification, too, is good, although the astrological headings may be regarded by 
the profane as fanciful. Physiognomy may now be scientifically studied by means 
of composite photography,” — Pa Mal Gazette. 


UNITED. Ry A. P. SINNETT. In 2 vols. crown 8vo, cloth. 


Published at 215. Now offered at Ios. 64. 


** Mr. Sinnett’s previous works on ‘ Esoteric Buddhism’ and ‘The Occult World’ 
in some way prepare the reader for the marvellous psychological phenomena with 
which the present volumes abound, and which cannot fail to have an irresistible 
charm for all those who love the byeways of speculation. There is, nevertheless, a 
weird attractiveness about ' United’ which makes even the non-believer intheosophy 
loth to put down the book when once he has taken it up; while to the lovers of 
occult phenomena it will prove irresistibly fascinating.”—Literary World. 

** It would be difficult to point to a more earnest writer than Mr. Sinnett, and all 
he says invariably carries force and weight..... 'The book has a power of its own 
which compels respect, and Mr. Sinnett is so much the same as he always is, so 
eager and sincere in expounding the mysteries in which he is a fervent believer, that 
one seems to be inspired with some of the curious fascination of his teaching. . ... 
In spite of all the improbable and weird fancies which have to be accepted by the 
student of the occult religion, it should always be borne in mind that its tenets are 
eminently elevating and beautiful; that it appeals to the best side of our nature. 
e.. . But allis vague confusion to the uninitiated, and it has to be reluctantly ad- 
mitted that, if attracted, one is sadly dazzled by the perusal of such a couple of 
volumes as ‘ United.’ The purpose of ‘United’ is a good one; it is written with 
marked ability, and the story is pleasantly related in the happy vein of a charac- 
teristic author. — Morning Advertiser, Dec. 31, 1886. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


MOR Or SPECIAL BOOKS. 13 


THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD. By Hermes MrR- 
CURIUS TRISMEGISTUS. A Treatise on Initiations, or Asclepios ; 
the Definitions of Asclepios; Fragments of the Writings of Hermes. 
Translated and Edited by the Authors of “The Perfect Way.” 
With an Introduction to ** The Virgin of the World” by A. K., 
and an Essay on ** The Hermetic Books” by E. M. Small 4to, 
with illustrations, bound in vegetable parchment, 10s. 64. 

** It will be a most interesting study for every occultist to compare the doctrines of 
the ancient Hermetic philosophy with the teaching or the Vedantic and Buddhist 
systems of religious thought. The famous books of Hermes seem to occupy, with 


reference to the Egyptian religion, the same position which the Upanishads occupy 
in Aryan religious literature."—7 4e Theosophist, November 1885. 


THE PATH: A Magazine devoted to the Brotherhood of 


Humanity, Theosophy in America, and the Study of Occult Science, 
Philosophy, and Aryan Literature. Edited by WILLIAM Q: JUDGE. 
(Published under the auspices of the Aryan Theosophical Society 
of New York.) Monthly. Subscription, 10s. per annum. 


ORGANIC MAGNETISM. Private Instructions in the 


Science and Art of Organic Magnetism. By Miss CHANDos LEIGH 
HUNT. 8vo, cloth, 215. 


This work gives minute practical instructions how to magnetise, mes- 
merise, entrance, fascinate, hypnotise, psychologise, comatise, &c. &c. 


ELEUSINIAN AND BACCHIC MYSTERIES. By Tuos. 


TAYLOR (the Platonist). Edited, with Introduction, Notes, Emend- 
ations, and Glossary, by ALEXANDER WILDER, M.D. Svo, cloth, 
155. 


APOLLONIUS OF TYANA. Sketch of the Life of 


Apollonius of Tyana; or, The First Ten Decades of our Era. By 
DANIEL M. TREDWELL. With Map, Svo, cloth, 15s. 


The character of Apollonius will always stand out as one of the grandest, if not 
the grandest, of his time. Mr. Tredwell, in this work, has given us the best modern 
account of Apollonius and his times, together with descriptions of the places he 
visited, illustrated by quotations that show a wide field of research has been tra- 
versed by the author. 

Lecky, in his History of European Morals, says: ** Apollonins of Tyana, at the 
close of the Flavian period, endeavoured with noble purpose to unite moral teaching 
with religious practices; the oracles, which had long ceased, were partially restored 
under Antoninus. The calamities and visible decline of the Empire withdrew the 
minds of men from that prond patriotic worship of Roman greatness. It was this 
worship, imbued with the highest moral doctrines or stoicism, which Apollonius 
laboured to restore." 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST, COVENT GARDEN, 


14 LIST OF SPECIAL BOOKS, 


THE KALPA SUTRA, AND NAVA TATVA. Two 


works illustrative of the Jain Religion and Philosophy. Translated, 
with Appendix, by Rev. Dr. STEVENSON. Post ὄνο, cloth, 6s. 


ISIS UNVEILED; a Master-key to the Mysteries of 
Ancient and Modern Science and Theology. By H. P. Bra- 
VATSKY. 2 vols. 8vo, 1400 pp., cloth. Last edition. 


This extensive work, forming a library in itself, should be possessed by every one 
interested in Oriental magic, literature, and religions. 

No subject of investigation is more attractive and less understood than the Reli- 
gious Philosophy of the Orientals. The religious and scientific wealth of the oldest 
peoples on the earth has been so jealously guarded from inquisitive foreigners by 
mysteries nnd jargon, that the many have denied the existence of anything worth 
seeking, and the few so discouraged by the obstacles in the road that, for the most 
part, they have been compelled to abandon the search. 

The author, Mme. BLAVATSKY, enters the field well equipped. A native of Asia 
—her childhood passed among the Calmucks, Tatars, Persians, and other Eastern 
peoples; her maturity among Hindus, Cingalese, Thibetans, and Egyptians— 
Oriental traditions, languages, literature, and mythology have long been her chief 
study and occupation. The immense fund of information stored up during years of 
thoughtful study and of observant travel in all lands, enable her to throw more light 
upon the esoteric philosophy of Eastern nations than perhaps any other writer who 
has contributed to the literature of this important subject. 


SEERSHIP. The Magnetic Mirror, a Practical Guide to 
those who aspire to Clairvoyance-absolute. Original and selected 
from various European and Asiatic Adepts. By P. B. RANDOLPH. 
Svo, cloth, ros. 62. 


YOGA PHILOSOPHY (THE) Being the Text of Patan- 
jali, with ΒΗΟΙΑ Raja’s Commentary. Translated into English, 
with Introduction, by Colonel OLCOTT. Revised edition. Svo, 
boards, 75. 6d. 


MYSTERY OF THE AGES (THE) contained in the 
Secret Doctrine of all Religions. By MARIE, COUNTESS OF CAITH- 
NESS. With Illustrations and Portrait of the Author. Svo, cloth, 


10s. 62. 
PSYCHOMETRY AND TEOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 


With Practical Hints for Experiments, and an Introduction. By 
HENRY S. OLCOTT. Svo, wrapper, Is. 64. 


PARMENIDES OF PLATO (THE): a Dialogue on the 
Gods. Translated from the Greek by THoMAs TAYLOR. With 
Notes, &c., by D. J. MEDHORA. 12mo, cloth, 35. 6d. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST,, COVENT GARDEN, 


LIST OF SPECIAL BOOKS. 15 


HIGHER ASPECTS OF SPIRITUALISM. By M. A. 
(Oxon.) 12mo, cloth, 3s. 64. 


Dealing with the present position and future needs of Spiritualism in England, 
and with Spiritualism in some of its religious aspects. The author complains that 
“ neither our great London circulating library, nor the great firm that supplies the 
travelling public with literature at the railway stations throughout the kingdom, 
will give any publicity to works on Spiritualism. . . . . The two great centres for the 
dissemination of English works do their best to stifle Spiritualism. It is well," 
continues the author, ‘‘ that this unique fact should be placed on record." 

** M. A. (Oxon.)" is well known as the most scholarly and the most temperate 


advocate of Spiritualism in England. 


BIBLIOTHECA CURIOSA, 


MAGIC PLANTS: Being a Translation of a curious tract 
entitled *«De Vegetalibus Magicis.” Written by M. J. H. 
HEUCHER (7700). Edited by E. GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S. 16mo, 
parchment, 45. 64. 

Only 350 copies were printed of this curious little work. 


In the press. 
SERPENT WORSHIP, and other Essays. By C. STANI- 
LAND WAKE. 


CONTENTS.— Rivers of Life—Phallism in Ancient Religions—The Origin 
of Serpent Worship—The Adamites—The Descendants of Cain— 
Sacred Prostitution— Marriage among Primitive Peoples— Marriage 
by Capture—Development of the * Family "—The Social Position 
of Women as affected by ‘‘ Civilisation,” ὥς, | 


PSYCHOMETRY. The Soul of Things; or, Psychometric 
Researches and Discoveries. Dy WM. and ELIz. DENTON. In 3 
vols., each vol. complete in itself. Post 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6¢. per vol. 


Vol. I. Pictures onthe retina and brain, and on surrounding objects—Questions, 
considerations, and suggestions. Vol. II. Geographical and archzological examina- 
tions. Vol. III. Geological and astronomical examinations, 

A most important work, showing how objects are seen psychometrically, and dis- 
playing the utility of psychometry to the geclogist, the paleontologist, the miner, 
the astronomer, the physiologist, and the anatomist. The extraordinary statements 
made by the authors have certainly been strengthened by time and recent discoveries, 
and probably the further revelations of science will demonstrate the truth of what 
in these volumes may still be regarded by some as wild and improbable. 


CHALDEAN MAGIC: its Origin and Development. Trans- 
lated from the French. With considerable Additions by the 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN. 


* 


16 LIST OF SPECIAL BOOKS. 


Author, and Notes by the Editor, By FRANGCOIS LENORMANT. 
ὄνο, cloth, 4s. 6d. - 
Chaldea was the home of Magic, Astrology, and every kind of Occult Science. 
M. Lenormant has translated the curious incantations in the cuneiform character 
which perhaps more than anything else throw light on the subject, and compared 
them with the Egyptian hieroglyphics on the Ritual of the Dead, which consisted 
in great part of magical rites. He also links to his main theme the Necromancy and 
Demonology of the Finns and Tartars, who were probably of kindred race to the 
Accadians, In short, he has produced a work of deep research and insight ona 
matter concerning which there was formerly little definite information. 


BHAGAVAD-GITA (THE); or, A Discourse between 
Krishna and Arjuna on Divine matters. A Sanskrit Philosophical 
Poem. ‘Translated, with Notes, &c., by J. C. THOoMsON. 8vo, 
cloth, ros. 6d. 


LIGHT ON THE PATH. A Treatise written for the 


Personal Use of those who are ignorant of the Eastern Wisdom, 
and who desire to enter within its influence. Written down by 
M. C. Sq. 39mo, cloth, 15. 62. 


THE PERFECT WAY; or, The Finding of Christ. By 
Dr. ANNA KINGSFORD and EDWARD MAITLAND. Revised and 
enlarged edition. 4to, cloth, 125. 64. 


A compendium of Esoteric Religion, Christian Theosophy and 
Mysticism, and Occult Science, showing the divine potentialities of 
humanity and their culmination in Christ, 


WORKS OF JACOB BOEHME. With Introduction by a 


Graduate of Glasgow University. Vol. I. THE EPISTLES., Small 
4.0, cloth, 75. 6d. 


TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY (THE) By ALFRED J. 
PEARCE (‘‘Zadkiel”). Vol. I. GENETHLIALOGY. Svo, cloth, 
Ios. 6d. à 


The second volume has not yet been published. This is quite com- 
plete in itself, and is the best modern work on the subject. 


CHARACTER INDICATED BY HANDWRITING: a 


Practical Treatise in support of the assertion that the Handwriting 
of a person is an infallible guide to his character. By Rosa 
BAUGHAN. Numerous illustrations. Revised edition. 12mo, cloth, 
25. 6d. 


GEORGE REDWAY, 15 YORK ST., COVFNT GARDEN. 


